He wants you to look, but also not to look, but he will be at the Emmys in this outfit!
Trevor Noah is not one of those celebrities who changes the center of gravity when he walks into a room, even when the room is his. The host of “The Daily Show” since September 2015, Mr. Noah has developed a command of the desk that used to belong to Jon Stewart. Off-camera, his presence is less pronounced.
During a recent fitting for the outfit he will wear to the Emmys, Mr. Noah was one of the most understated people in his office. Three immaculately suited men were on hand to ensure the fit was correct, and they took a moment to react to his entry.
It is a bright moment for Mr. Noah. His show is nominated in the Variety Talk Series category, making it the first time “The Daily Show” has been up for an Emmy in a nontechnical category under his guidance; under Mr. Stewart it was nominated 15 times in the category and won 10 awards. Last fall, Mr. Noah’s contract was extended through 2022, thanks in part to its popularity with younger viewers.
Though the format of “The Daily Show” has long-since grown familiar, Mr. Noah’s willingness to stick to the show’s beats in the midst of a chaotic political moment seems to have been a comfort to his audience. He sees himself as a weatherman, he said, helping viewers to track Hurricane Trump.
The first suit he owned, he said, was his school uniform, an outfit that he treasured because it did not make him feel inferior to his peers.
Because Mr. Noah grew up poor, and because his mother was black and his father white — making his appearance evidence of a crime in apartheid South Africa (his best-selling 2016 memoir was titled “Born a Crime”) — he always tried to draw as little attention to himself as possible.
But as his profile has grown, Mr. Noah, 34, has become more willing to flex stylistically. Shannon Turgeon, who manages his wardrobe on and off the show, said that the two of them had decided, at the beginning of this year, to start dressing the host more boldly, particularly at event appearances, such as the Met Gala.
That’s why she and Mr. Noah decided to enlist Musika Frère, a brand born on Instagram that has dressed stars including Michael B. Jordan and Stephen Curry. Its founders, Aleks Musika and Davidson Petit-Frère, were present at the fitting of the custom-fit silk mohair tuxedo, even helping Mr. Noah to tie his velvet Christian Louboutin dress shoes.
As with his captaining of the show, though, Mr. Noah was not overly eager to shake things up. He asked the designers for a classic look that would hint at his willingness to try something new without going over the top.
The result, to the untrained eye, was largely traditional. It took Mr. Musika’s guidance to understand that the three-button lapel vest that the designers had prepared for Mr. Noah as a surprise was less than traditional, or that the velvet on his lapel or at his waist was unusual.
Mr. Noah likes to keep surprises to a minimum. He uses the things he’s learned to make others feel comfortable. (When he meets people, he repeats their names several times, quietly, almost to himself.) Ms. Turgeon said he was “offended easily by clothing,” particularly by outfits that do not make sense, or seem to provoke for the sake of provocation.
This is not to say he finds fashion particularly shallow.
