Recently, Interview magazine published a conversation between the actress Kerry Washington and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez accompanied by photographs of the young politician wearing a fitted blazer with wide lapels and green piping; a slim, matching set of trousers; and an elegant pair of black stilettos from Manolo Blahnik, the total cost for which was somewhere around $3,500.
Just as the left spun into fury when Melania Trump boarded a plane to the Mexican border to tour a shelter for immigrant children wearing a jacket that read, “I really don’t care. Do U?,” the right found outrage in what it regarded as discordant messaging — a democratic socialist who looked as if she were going to Davos or Balthazar.
The hosts of “Fox & Friends,” had a great time telling everyone they didn’t own, or want, $600 shoes.
Appropriating signifiers from across class lines is, of course, a standard political move used to memorable advantage by, among others, George W. Bush, who successfully masked his patrician origins every time he put on a pair of Wranglers, a cowboy hat and a barn jacket.
While authenticity is a sought-after characteristic in contemporary American politics, its currency is fairly limited. It is hard to imagine someone like John V. Lindsay, coming up in today’s system, persuading the poor he understood their suffering while looking as though he had started each morning on the squash court. The imperative to mirror the demographic you are trying to court will always be called out as hypocrisy by the opposition when it seems phony or betraying and yet often it is simply the deployment of tactical ingenuity.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez needs the center-left — surely emboldened by Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s primary victory last week — to warm to her, to imagine that she isn’t going to tear down the castles. How terrifying can someone dressed as though she had just left a meeting with six venture capitalists with a rare bottle of scotch really be to the occupants of the higher tax brackets?
I imagined that he was equally thrilled with the announcement that Michael Bloomberg, the high-priest of Wall Street-loving centrism, was thinking about getting into the next presidential race.