Three decades after landing in New York with RuPaul, Lady Bunny rules as New York’s reigning drag queen, even as a younger generation nips at her heels.
“Testes, testes, one, two, three!” a voice rasped over the sound system in a cheeky Southern drawl.
It was the first day of September, and the occasion was Wigstock, the storied drag extravaganza that was making a bedazzled return at the South Street Seaport after a 17-year hiatus.
Finally, the correct song played, and the owner of that Tennessee twang emerged in full splendor. As most of the crowd already knew, it was Lady Bunny, Wigstock’s buxom, potty-mouthed founder and ringmaster, wearing a kimono-sleeved metallic-gold minidress and a towering blond bouffant.
She was flanked by three other drag veterans in gold, who traded unprintable barbs (mostly about who was the oldest or most promiscuous). After a few minutes, Neil Patrick Harris, who helped revive Wigstock with his husband, David Burtka, popped onstage in a tank top. “It is my job as the producer of this show to keep things moving,” Mr. Harris said.
Like a record store clinging to a gentrified block, her insult-comedy style is a throwback to her scrappy East Village roots — or maybe just a stubborn refusal to evolve with the times.
A week later, an inconspicuous 56-year-old materialized at a West Village coffee shop and said, “I’m Bunny’s evil twin.” The voice was instantly recognizable, but little else: wavy shoulder-length gray hair, wrinkled forehead, naked lips. In her black punk-rock T-shirt and sneakers, she looked more like a part-time guitar teacher than an undercover queen.
Even offstage, however, her friends call her Bunny, rather than her birth name, Jon Ingle. She also prefers to be addressed by a female pronoun, even as she balks at what she sees as the younger L.G.B.T. generation's hypersensitivity to gender labels.
She has also benefited from the global spotlight of “RuPaul’s Drag Race.” Lady Bunny was recently invited to do a gig in Cardiff, Wales, which she acknowledges never would have happened without the RuPaul effect.
And yet she has misgivings about what “Drag Race” has wrought.
Lady Bunny grew up in Chattanooga, Tenn., where she was an outlier from the start.
Bunny’s father, H. Larry Ingle, was a history professor at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga. The family’s liberal politics made them black sheep in 1960s Tennessee. The Ingles were vocal opponents of discriminatory housing and the Vietnam War, and they lobbied the City Council to end Chattanooga’s Armed Forces Day parade.
There, she met RuPaul Charles, an ambitious glamour puss two years her senior. They became go-go dancers for a local new wave band, the Now Explosion, dressing themselves in thrift-store exotica.
In 1983, she followed RuPaul to New York City, where for a time they shared an apartment in the still ungentrified meatpacking district. The epicenter of East Village drag was the Pyramid Club on Avenue A, and RuPaul and Lady Bunny (as she now called herself) became in-house queens, go-go dancing for $40 a night.
Michael Alig, the night life promoter who later went to prison for first-degree manslaughter, kept her busy with club gigs. “Michael paid my rent for 10 years,” she said.
RuPaul, meanwhile, moved to Hollywood and became a superstar. He now has a hit show, multiple Emmys and a husband with a 60,000-acre ranch in Wyoming. Inevitably, fame put some distance between him and Lady Bunny, whose open criticism of TV’s reigning queen has led to the perception of a rivalry.
Bunny says they reconnected on the set of the 2008 film “Another Gay Sequel” and now communicate sporadically by email. “Some people who love the idea that drag queens are bitchy, because it’s seen through the prism of reality-TV shows, like to imagine that there is more tension between Ru and me than there actually is,” she said.
In recent years, debates about offensive language have rankled the drag world, as transgender people have objected to terms like “tranny,” which some longtime drag queens see as their birthright.
Lady Bunny has held firm, mocking political correctness in her solo show “Trans-Jester!,” which she performed at the Stonewall Inn in 2016, even as Donald Trump was fanning his presidential campaign with similar gripes.
When it returned this fall, a dearth of sponsors and trouble finding a site until late forced organizers to charge $95 for tickets, drawing grumbles that Wigstock, like the rest of Manhattan, was no longer affordable.
She closed out the night with a medley of pop songs rewritten with X-rated lyrics. (Katy Perry’s “You’re gonna hear me roar” became “Boy, is it ever sore.”) She brought out her multigenerational cast of queens for a bow.
But at the stroke of 10 p.m., the lights went off and her microphone cut out mid-quip. She looked at it quizzically, then kept on talking.