De Middel, born in Alicante, Spain, in 1975, some four decades after Cartier-Bresson photographed sex workers there, was trained as a photojournalist and worked in the Spanish press. But she became dissatisfied with traditional photojournalism and moved into artistic projects. Her first completed project, “The Afronauts,” a playful reimagining of a peculiar episode in the space race, was self-published in 2012. Several other projects have followed. The most recent one, the one about the male clients of female sex workers, is called “Gentleman’s Club.” Her newspaper ad in Rio de Janeiro indicated that she would pay the men for their time and this reversal of roles. In the years that followed, she expanded the project to Bangkok, Havana and Paris, and she intends to go on to other cities, including Mumbai and Las Vegas.
Hugo, 70 years old. Santa Claus. Single and, as far as he knows, doesn’t have any children. He visits prostitutes 2 or 3 times a day and usually doesn’t pay. He started visiting prostitutes at the age of 12 and he continues to do so because he believes that’s what women are made for.
The men in these photos are of various races, ages and income levels. They collectively show us the usually concealed demand behind the overly familiar supply. It is a conventional execution of a brilliantly uncommon subject.
The project’s artistic success leads me to return again to “The Afronauts,” De Middel’s first project, which was a “success” too, but in a different, and troubling, way. What looking at the two projects side by side suggests is that unraveling stereotypes is difficult to do without first bridging certain distances: going to places, meeting people, collaborating with them or somehow embedding their perspectives in work that is about them.
Shortly after it was published in 2012, “The Afronauts” became a sensation and garnered De Middel some of the biggest accolades in photography: an Infinity Award from the International Center of Photography and a nomination to the shortlist of the Deutsche Börse Photography Prize. Numerous exhibitions followed, as well as travel invitations, project proposals and, in 2017, a nomination to membership in Magnum Photos.
“The Afronauts” was based on the failed attempt by a Zambian, Edward Festus Mukuka Nkoloso, in 1964 to get a space program going in his country. Nkoloso had founded something called the Zambia National Academy of Science, Space Research and Philosophy to achieve this vision. What was notable about Nkoloso’s efforts, though, was that they were unofficial. He recruited 11 men and a teenage girl as his “Afronauts” (the coinage was his). They participated in drills, the most notable of which was rolling down a hillside inside a metal drum. He vowed to send a rocket to the moon. He promised to launch the teenage girl to Mars.
Nkoloso was a respected veteran of the World War II as well as an admired fighter and agitator in the anticolonial struggle against British rule. (Zambia became independent in 1964.) But he had no conventional laboratories, no real budget and no training in aeronautics. He was far from the mainstream of scientific practice. When he died in 1989, he was buried with state honors, for his anticolonial activity. As for the space stuff, most Zambians found it silly and unrealistic.
De Middel wished to “explore the representation of Africa while challenging ideas around diaspora, race, and societal power structures.” But “The Afronauts” does not live up to this promise. As stated in a short video she made to accompany the project, “Zambia started a space program that aimed to put the first African on the moon.” But Zambia did no such thing. What is served by eliding one highly unconventional individual with an actual African nation? How does that challenge misconceptions about Africa?
Between “The Afronauts” (2012) and “Gentleman’s Club” (begun 2015 and continuing), De Middel has been prolific. She has begun and completed numerous projects, which have received only a fraction of the attention granted “The Afronauts.” But the recent work poses important questions and is finding difficult answers to them. Her 2015 book “This Is What Hatred Did” is based on the 1954 novel “My Life in the Bush of Ghosts,” by the Nigerian novelist Amos Tutuola, and was shot over a long engagement with a community in Lagos. Gone are the grass skirts and elephants. Instead, there are direct references to Yoruba masking traditions and contemporary charismatic Christianity. “Sharkification” (2015) looks at violence in Rio de Janeiro by photographing favelas with blue filters that give the scenes the aquamarine glow of a coral reef. “Midnight at the Crossroads” (2018), in collaboration with Bruno Morais, combines staged images with real ones and is shot in Benin, Cuba, Haiti and Brazil to evoke the enduring power of Vodun. And there is “Gentleman’s Club,” which is meticulous, particular and ultimately moving.
These projects, some of which work better than others, are unlikely to bring De Middel the sensational notice that “The Afronauts” did. They are significant stations on one artist’s evolutionary path, showing how she is surviving the “success” of her early work. They take her from the wish to dismantle clichés to actually doing so. The intuition I see developing in De Middel’s work is that for the strange to be truly strange, it must find its way to something true. Memorable strangeness needs new language. When we dream, we don’t dream in other people’s clichés of us.