WASHINGTON — President Trump said he rejected a meeting with Prime Minister Justin Trudeau of Canada during the United Nations General Assembly this week and threatened on Wednesday to punish Canada by taxing the cars it exports into America, signaling a new low in relations between the two nations.
Mr. Trump’s comments come after months of tense trade negotiations between Canada and the United States have failed to produce an agreement and as the White House prepares to move ahead with a bilateral trade deal with just Mexico.
Trade tensions between the United States and Canada have been rising for months, and relations between Mr. Trump and Mr. Trudeau have soured amid disagreements over the future of the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Mr. Trump said he turned down a meeting with Mr. Trudeau because Canada had treated the United States “very badly” and because of its high dairy tariffs, which are preventing the United States from selling milk into Canada. A spokesman for Mr. Trudeau said the prime minister never requested such a meeting.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump appeared to snub Mr. Trudeau when he did not stand to shake the Canadian prime minister’s hand during a lunch at the United Nations summit meeting. Mr. Trudeau said the two leaders did not meet because their schedules were full of meetings with leaders from far-flung countries.
But Mr. Trump did not offer a similar excuse, instead berating Canada over its negotiating style and its negotiator. “We don’t like their representative very much,” Mr. Trump said Wednesday, apparently referring to Chrystia Freeland, the Canadian foreign minister, who has been leading the Nafta talks for her country. Ms. Freeland has irked some in the administration by giving speeches suggesting that the United States, under Mr. Trump’s leadership, is turning its back on democratic values and its traditional role as a global leader.
Mr. Trump left open the possibility of reaching a deal with Canada, but said there would be no more Nafta.
“I don’t like Nafta. I’ve never liked it. It’s been very bad for the United States. It’s been great for Canada, great for Mexico,” Mr. Trump said, adding that he would rename the pact “U.S.M.C.” for United States-Mexico-Canada.
The Trump administration is expected to send Congress text of a new Nafta on Friday that does not include Canada, according to congressional aides and others familiar with the discussions, raising doubts about the ability to keep the 25-year-old trilateral pact intact.
One month after the United States and Mexico reached a bilateral trade deal, talks between American and Canadian officials have yet to produce a similar agreement, with significant differences unresolved.
Robert Lighthizer, Mr. Trump’s top trade negotiator, said on Wednesday that “at this point, we are running out of time” for negotiations with the Canadians.
The impending failure to reach an agreement among the three countries by Sept. 30 is creating a new round of uncertainty for companies whose supply chains and businesses depend on access to all three markets and for lawmakers, who must determine whether they can allow the United States to go it alone with Mexico.
Mexico and the United States want to sign a final deal before the new Mexican government takes over on Dec. 1, and the final text of trade agreements must be released 60 days before they are signed by the president, under United States law, fueling the deadline.
Mr. Trump would not commit to pulling out of Nafta but said he was willing to go it alone with Mexico for now.
Canada has said it will not allow the United States deadline to govern the trade talks. After marathon talks this month, Mr. Lighthizer and Ms. Freeland scheduled no formal meetings in Washington this week.
“We will keep working as long as it takes to get to the right deal for Canada,” Mr. Trudeau said at a news conference in New York on Wednesday.
Canadian and American officials have tried to avoid negotiating in public, but in recent days their differences have started to spill out. Speaking at an event sponsored by Politico in Toronto on Wednesday, David MacNaughton, Canada’s ambassador to the United States, said Canada wanted protection from the Trump administration’s use of tariffs on national security grounds.
Upcoming elections in Quebec, a province whose economy is heavily dependent on dairy, have also complicated negotiations for Canada’s leaders as they look to close a deal with the United States.
Canada is the largest export market for America, and members of Congress from both parties have been adamant that it should be included in any agreement with Mexico. Congress must ratify major trade deals, and an agreement that excludes Canada is expected be difficult to pass. There is also an ongoing legal debate as to whether the president has the authority to terminate Nafta on his own. If Nafta is terminated, Canada and Mexico could continue to trade on its terms or work together on their own new free trade agreement.
The agreement the United States reached with Mexico in August updates Nafta provisions on the digital economy, automobiles, agriculture and labor unions. Among the most significant alterations are changes to rules governing car manufacturing, in an effort to bring more car production back to the United States from Mexico.
The core of the trade pact — which allows American companies to operate in Mexico and Canada without tariffs — remains intact.
With Nafta negotiations floundering, administration officials and Japanese leaders announced that they would open bilateral negotiations toward a free-trade agreement between the two nations.
The joint statement said the United States’ goal in negotiations was to lift its auto industry. It also noted that Japanese officials would not exceed “Japan’s previous economic partnership agreements” in opening up its markets for agricultural and forestry imports. That effectively means that the Trump administration concedes it will not win greater concessions in those areas from the Japanese than the Obama administration did in negotiating the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which Mr. Trump rejected after taking office.