BEIRUT, Lebanon — Despite attacks that have killed dozens of civilians at a time, the Trump administration on Wednesday certified that Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates are doing enough to minimize the deadly impact of their military campaign in Yemen.
The certification, announced by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo, was legally required to allow American military aircraft to continue refueling warplanes belonging to the two Gulf nations, the dominant members of an Arab coalition fighting a brutal war in Yemen that has helped create the world’s worst humanitarian crisis.
Mr. Pompeo’s move came amid rising concern in Washington about the coalition’s prosecution of the war and worries among some lawmakers that American weapons were being used to commit war crimes and that American officials could be held liable.
In its efforts to oust Yemen’s Houthi rebels from the capital, Sana, the coalition has bombed weddings, funerals, factories and other civilian infrastructure, often with munitions acquired from the United States. The aerial assaults have elicited harsh criticisms from United Nations investigators and human rights groups, who have also accused the Houthis of violating the laws of war.
In response to similar assaults, Congress included in a defense bill signed by Mr. Trump last month a clause that required Mr. Pompeo to certify that Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates were doing enough to avoid harming civilians. Without that certification, they would lose the aerial refueling services provided by the United States.
In his statement on Wednesday, Mr. Pompeo said they were doing enough.
“The governments of Saudi Arabia and United Arab Emirates are undertaking demonstrable actions to reduce the risk of harm to civilians and civilian infrastructure resulting from military operations of these governments,” Mr. Pompeo said.
He also said that ending the war in Yemen was “a national security priority” and that the United States would continue working with Gulf allies to pursue peace talks and ensure delivery of humanitarian aid.
The charity Oxfam, a longtime provider of assistance to Yemeni civilians, denounced the decision as having enabled the continuation of a horrific war.
The war in Yemen began in 2014, when the Houthis, who are aligned with Iran, Saudi Arabia’s regional rival, seized control of the country’s northwest, including the capital, sending the government into exile.
In March 2015, a military coalition of Arab nations led by Saudi Arabia launched a bombing campaign aimed at ousting the Houthis and restoring the government. It has so far failed to achieve either objective, and the war has led to widespread hunger and the spread of dangerous diseases, like cholera.
The intervention has been a dilemma to officials in both the Obama and Trump administrations, who had to choose between supporting close Gulf allies who have spent many billions of dollars on American weapons and holding them accountable for waging war in a way that rights groups and others say has caused egregious harm to civilians.
The United States has offered some assistance in the campaign, sharing intelligence, helping Saudi Arabia protect its southern border and refueling coalition jets in midair, but United States officials say they play no role in target selection.
Much of the debate has revolved around the best way for the United States to influence the coalition’s actions. Some have argued for punitive steps, like curtailing military aid. Others have counter-argued that American disengagement could worsen matters.
It was the counterargument that prevailed on Wednesday, at least in part because of the strong relationships between the White House and the Gulf countries.
In Washington, some Trump administration officials tracking the war in Yemen have increasingly expressed anxieties over the civilian deaths in internal conversations, said Andrew Miller, deputy director for policy at the Project on Middle East Democracy. Those include officials working on the issue at the State Department and Defense Department, he said.
“I do think there is growing concern, although it hasn’t reached the point that has translated to a change in policy,” said Mr. Miller, who worked on Middle East policy on the National Security Council in the Obama administration and was a State Department official.
However, those officials have little or no direct access to the White House and Cabinet members. And Jared Kushner, Mr. Trump’s son-in-law and the top White House adviser on the Middle East, is in close touch with Saudi and Emirati officials.
“Gulf relations are impaired by the sense among Saudis and Emiratis that all they need is Trump and Kushner, and they don’t need anyone else,” Mr. Miller said.
Saudi officials say the coalition exerts great efforts to minimize harm to civilians and has established an internal body to investigate reported violations of the laws of war. Early this month, the coalition admitted “mistakes” in the bombing of the school bus and said those responsible would be held accountable.
The certification signed by Mr. Pompeo said the Trump administration had recognized that “civilian casualties have occurred at rates that are far too high.” But it said the coalition had taken steps to improve, including developing a no-strike list of sensitive targets and putting Saudi pilots through American training on avoiding civilian deaths.
Rights groups have said similar efforts have been going on for years and appeared to have had little effect. Some openly dismiss the coalition’s professed interest in investigating itself.
Others, too, accuse the coalition of doing too little.
Larry L. Lewis, a former State Department official who visited Saudi Arabia five times in 2015 and 2016 to help the country’s air force improve its targeting and investigations, said the certification showed that the administration either lacked the will to push the coalition to improve or did not know what it meant to do “everything possible” to reduce civilian casualties.
