U.S.|A Rural Town Banded Together to Open a Hospital. Its Foe? A Larger Hospital.
A Rural Town Banded Together to Open a Hospital. Its Foe? A Larger Hospital.
Even when a town wants to open a new hospital to make up for a lack of health care, the challenges can be enormous.
Dr. Beau Braden, right, during a home visit with 5-month-old Juana Pascual in Immokalee, Fla.
IMMOKALEE, Fla. — Not long after Beau Braden moved to southwest Florida to open a medical clinic, injured strangers started showing up at his house. A boy who had split open his head at the pool. People with gashes and broken bones. There was nowhere else to go after hours, they told him, so Dr. Braden stitched them up on his dining room table.
They were 40 miles inland from the coral-white condos and beach villas of Naples, but Dr. Braden said that this rural stretch of Collier County, with tomato farms and fast-growing exurbs, had fewer hospital beds per person than Afghanistan.
So when he proposed starting a 25-bed rural hospital to serve the 50,000 people who live in the farming town of Immokalee and the nearby planned community of Ave Maria, people rallied to the idea. They envisioned a place where mothers could give birth and sick children could get 24-hour help — their own novel solution to an exodus of hospital care from rural America.
But then this summer, a larger hospital in Naples derailed those plans by asking the state to deny the proposal, saying that the small, rural hospital would siphon away patients and revenue. The move has upended people’s hopes around Immokalee and delayed any plans to start building the hospital for months. Maybe for good.
“It’s just horribly mean,” Dr. Braden said.
Rural communities across the country are suffering the effects of hospital closures because of shrinking populations, financial strains and corporate consolidations. Since 2010, 87 rural hospitals have closed.
But as Dr. Braden learned, even when a town wants to open a new hospital to make up for the loss in care, the challenges can be enormous. Just to open the doors, rural hospital projects need to raise millions of dollars for construction, equipment and salaries for doctors and nurses. They need to woo highly trained staff to out-of-the way towns. They must thread a maze of regulations without an army of experts and high-priced consultants, which are available to larger hospitals.
“These things are daunting,” said Diane Calmus, counsel for the National Rural Health Association.
Officials with Naples Community Hospital, also known as NCH Health Systems, did not respond to several phone messages, and an attorney for the hospital declined to comment further on its 50-page opposition statement, which asked the state to rescind an important first approval it had granted the proposed hospital in June.
The larger hospital also questioned whether Dr. Braden’s experience running a financially struggling, small-town health clinic was enough to prepare him for the huge challenges of a 25-bed hospital serving a poor population with high numbers of uninsured people.
Dr. Braden and other local health officials said the Immokalee area is facing a health crisis, one mirrored in other underserved rural areas across the country.
Babies are regularly born in ambulances before they can reach a hospital, and adults drive themselves bleeding to the hospital when the three available ambulances get swamped with calls, emergency responders say. Children younger than 1 die at triple the rate of the rest of Collier County, and the number of people dying in places like fields or parking lots grew by 143 percent from 2014 to 2017, according to state health statistics that Dr. Braden submitted to regulators.
Juana was born with encephalitis, which resulted in an infection in her brain.
She will have to use a ventilator for the rest of her life.
“You keep asking yourself, Is this true? Is this America?” Dr. Braden said.
Immokalee is a town built on lush land and hard labor. About 95 percent of its residents are Latino or black (there is a large Haitian community), and the town’s agriculture industry has long been a scene of battles over fair wages and farmworker rights. Thousands of migrant workers arrive every year for the tomato and orange harvests, squeezing into hurricane-scarred trailers and one-room shacks, multiplying local health needs.
Nearly one in two residents is foreign-born, and the poverty rate is about 45 percent. People have few options if they get sick or topple from a ladder in a citrus grove.
Maria Pascual knows the limits of Immokalee’s health system. Her 5-month-old daughter, Juana, was born with severe brain damage from an infection. She needs a ventilator to breathe and a thicket of tubes and wires to feed her, keep her airway clear and monitor her pulse and blood oxygen levels.
Juana relies on an ambulance to get to her doctor’s appointments, but Ms. Pascual said the vehicles were sometimes busy shuttling emergency patients to hospitals 45 miles away or pulled away to answer calls in Naples. Juana has already missed two appointments this summer.
Then there was the day in June when the girl’s pulse shot up to 220 beats per minute and she ran a 104-degree fever. The ambulance came quickly to take Ms. Pascual and Juana to the hospital, but as they sailed past orange groves and open fields, there was a clunk clunk! The vehicle shuddered to a stop on the side of the road. Minutes ticked by as the mother and daughter waited for a working ambulance to take them the rest of the way.
“They had to put towels on her just to cool her down,” Ms. Pascual said.
Infant death rates around Immokalee rose 12 percent from 2015 to 2017, according to state statistics analyzed by Dr. Braden. Stroke deaths are rising. Out-of-hospital births have risen by more than 164 percent in the past three years.
Collier County emergency medical workers and Immokalee firefighters respond to an emergency.
Firefighters in the area sometimes respond to medical calls because of a shortage of ambulances.
A federal-funded rural health clinic run by the Healthcare Network of Southwest Florida does provide family physicians, dentists and prenatal care to local residents, as well as services like X-rays, a pharmacy and some mental-health care. But the clinic closes at 5 p.m. and is shut most weekends. It cannot accept patients brought by ambulance.
But it has become Immokalee’s de facto emergency room. A woman in labor recently waved down a bus to take her to the clinic, and a father brought in a daughter in liver failure, the clinic’s staff said. They tried to treat these patients in their triage room and get the nearest ambulance to take them to an emergency room.
A few doctors have offices in town, but patients say their hours are unpredictable. One afternoon, an older man who had been waiting outside a locked doctor’s office slid off his walker and curled up on the shaded pavement under an awning. He just needed to rest, he said.
“There’s huge need,” said Representative Mario Diaz-Balart, the area’s Republican congressman.
Dr. Braden, 40, said he realized this soon after he and his wife moved in 2014 to Ave Maria, where they are raising five children. He specializes in emergency medicine and frequently flies himself from Immokalee’s tiny airfield to pull overnight shifts at nearby hospitals.
When he started pulling together the hospital application to the state, letters of support flowed in from the fire department, county commissioners, local businesses, developers and nonprofit health providers.
The hospital would be built on the edge of Ave Maria, about seven miles south of Immokalee, on land now owned by a development company that supported the proposal. But the hospital still exists only in blueprints and paperwork.
After years of work and spending about $400,000 from a family trust on lawyers, consultants and state filing fees, Dr. Braden submitted a 2,000-page application to Florida’s health care regulators this spring, seeking a critical state approval called a certificate of need.
Florida is one of 35 states with laws aimed at preventing too many hospitals from being built in the same area, or having too many hospital beds and redundant services. Supporters have to convince the state they are building something necessary. Without a certificate of need, the project cannot get off the ground.
Getting that approval represented just the first step of a steep slog for the new hospital. Dr. Braden would still need to get a construction loan for millions of dollars, order equipment, recruit staff and decide how to structure the hospital as a business.
In June, Florida regulators did grant that first necessary approval, the certificate of need. They agreed with what people in Immokalee had long argued: The community was in need of a hospital. The state cited the long distances people had to drive and the increasingly dire health situation for children.
But with the existing hospital in Naples now challenging that decision, it could take at least six months of depositions and hearings before the dispute is resolved. The legal bills to fight the challenge could run Dr. Braden $600,000, he said.
