WASHINGTON — North Korea engaged in a yearslong effort to hack into American companies and steal from financial institutions around the globe, the Justice Department charged on Thursday in a 174-page criminal complaint that detailed how hackers caused hundreds of millions of dollars’ worth of damage to the global economy.
Only one North Korean, Park Jin-hyok, was named — charged with computer fraud and wire fraud in the 2014 hack of Sony Pictures Entertainment. But the complaint described a team of hackers for North Korea’s main intelligence agency, in many cases operating out of China and other Asian nations, who crippled Britain’s health care system in last year’s WannaCry attack and stole $81 million from the Bangladeshi central bank — a heist that would have reaped $1 billion, save for a spelling error — before turning to vulnerable institutions from Vietnam to South Africa.
North Korea seemed primarily motivated by its continuing need for cash, as other countries have refused to do business with Pyongyang, and a desire to control American corporate behavior through fear. WannaCry presented the possibility that the North also wanted to sow chaos.
The complaint was the most specific public accounting yet of North Korea’s cyberattacks against other countries. The Justice Department has now brought charges against state actors from North Korea, China, Iran and Russia, the United States’ most formidable cyberfoes.
The complaints and indictments have been seen as a key tool in deterring attacks; the Trump administration also imposed sanctions on Mr. Park as part of a broad punishment. But as officials tried to convey that North Korea would pay a high price for hacking American targets, President Trump undercut their effort with a friendly tweet about the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, hours before the complaint was announced.
It was unclear whether Mr. Trump knew about the forthcoming complaint. A Justice Department official would not directly answer when asked whether he was briefed in advance.
The complaint against Mr. Park was filed under seal on June 8, just four days before Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim held a historic summit meeting in Singapore.
Diplomacy between the two countries has been stalled since, with the president abruptly canceling a trip to North Korea last month by Secretary of State Mike Pompeo. Last week, Mr. Trump accused China of undermining American relations with the North.
The complaint described only one side of the yearslong cyberconflict between North Korea and the United States. It made no mention of the American-led attacks on North Korea’s missile program, ordered by President Barack Obama months before the Sony attack. And it omitted the source of some of the weapons in the WannaCry attack, which were leaked or stolen from the National Security Agency, though the United States has not publicly conceded that.
Cyberattacks have not been a topic of the recent negotiations with North Korea. But as the complaint makes clear, such weapons have been the North’s primary tool against American targets.
“The North Korean government, through a state-sponsored group, robbed a central bank and citizens of other nations, retaliated against free speech in order to chill it half a world away, and created disruptive malware that indiscriminately affected victims in more than 150 other countries, causing hundreds of millions, if not billions, of dollars’ worth of damage,” John C. Demers, the head of the Justice Department’s National Security Division, said in a statement.
Mr. Park, who also went by the alias Pak Jin Hek, is unlikely to see the inside of an American courtroom. The United States has no direct, formal relations with North Korea and did not communicate with its reclusive government ahead of the charges.
Adding him to the Treasury Department’s sanctions list means that no financial institution that does business in the United States can also do business with or provide accounts to Mr. Park or Chosun Expo Joint Venture, the company he worked for that American officials said was a front for the government. He actually appeared to work for North Korea’s Reconnaissance General Bureau, the country’s closest equivalent to the C.I.A., intelligence officials said.
The sanctions are unlikely to have much effect on Mr. Park and are a less powerful tool than the criminal charges in ensuring that Mr. Park cannot travel far outside North Korea and outing him as a state-sponsored hacker.
In its complaint, the government mapped out a yearslong, brazen scheme to undermine institutions around the world and steal millions of dollars.
North Korea broke into the systems of Sony Pictures Entertainment in late 2014 in retaliation for the company’s production of a comedic film, “The Interview,” that mocked Mr. Kim and depicted a plot to assassinate him.
The attack wiped out 70 percent of the studio’s computer capability, erasing all the data on about half of the company’s personal computers and more than half of its servers. Sony was left without voice mail, email or production systems, essentially crippling operations.
Vast amounts of stolen Sony files were publicly revealed — emails, contracts, salary lists, film budgets, medical records, digital copies of five movies. Amy Pascal, then the studio’s top film executive, lost her job.
A month later, the F.B.I. pinned the crime on North Korea and the White House soon imposed sanctions on the country.
The crime underscored how vulnerable the United States had become to cybercriminals and how malicious actors far away could cripple American corporations. Hackers from China, Russia and elsewhere would soon infiltrate other high-profile targets including the Office of Personnel Management, the White House email system and the I.R.S.
Mr. Park and the other North Korean hackers would go on to engage in cyberattacks around the globe.
From 2015 through 2018, they attacked banks to amass funds for North Korea, according to the complaint. They infiltrated Bangladesh Bank in 2016 by sending malware-ridden emails to employees, a practice known as phishing, and eventually gained access to computers connected to the global banking communication system.
They directed the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to transfer money from Bangladesh Bank to accounts in other Asian countries, stealing $81 million. Only because an alert official at the reserve bank noticed that the word “foundation” was spelled “fandation” did the transaction get additional scrutiny, and it was halted before more than an additional $900 million was transferred, the complaint said.
Over the same time, the North unsuccessfully targeted American defense contractors, including Lockheed Martin, with spear-phishing emails, in which malicious files or links are sent in a seemingly innocuous message.
The complaint gave the most detailed technical accounting yet of how the crippling WannaCry malware made its way around the globe. It also made clear that the malware turned into an unguided missile — in which the British health care system, which used outdated Microsoft operating systems, turned out to be especially vulnerable.
It acknowledged that some of the code, originally from the National Security Agency, was published by a group calling itself the Shadow Brokers. But the code’s American roots went unmentioned in the complaint — in essence, an extension of the American government’s position that the North, rather than the American code makers who lost their weapons, bore complete responsibility for the attack.
North Korea operated relatively freely in China, according to the complaint. Chosun Expo Joint Venture helped fund North Korean hacking organizations by doing legitimate programming work from an office in Dalian, China, a coastal city near North Korea. Some customers knew the employees “were North Korean computer programmers connected to the government,” the complaint said.
Even though the Justice Department made clear that many North Koreans were involved in the attacks, only Mr. Park was charged because the government apparently believed it had evidence to convict only him beyond a reasonable doubt, said John Carlin, the former head of the Justice Department’s National Security Division.
The Justice Department said the investigation is continuing. The indictment took years to put together, in part because it covers multiple hacking campaigns and because the government cannot use classified information when it brings a criminal case against a nation-state.
