Mac Miller, a Pittsburgh rapper who built a loyal cult fan base with low-key charisma and intimate verses, died on Friday at his home in the San Fernando Valley in California. He was 26.
Mr. Miller had recently released his fifth full-length album, “Swimming,” which opened at No. 3 on the Billboard album chart. An early internet success story, he topped the chart with his independent debut, “Blue Slide Park,” in 2011, the first indie album to do so in 16 years.
Though he began as a mischievous party-starter, Mr. Miller, who often made his own beats, turned toward darker sounds and motifs. He rapped about substance abuse, having spoken in interviews about an addiction to prescription opiate cough syrup. And he cultivated a following with bracing lyrics about struggling with depression.
In 2016, Mr. Miller found a more extreme form of fame through a romantic relationship with the pop star Ariana Grande. He appeared on “The Way,” a 2013 collaboration with Ms. Grande, that reached No. 9 on the Billboard Hot 100, his highest-charting single. Ms. Grande announced this year that the couple had broken up.
In May, Mr. Miller was arrested in Los Angeles after his Mercedes G-Wagon hit a utility pole. He was charged in August with two counts of driving under the influence.
Days later, in a statement, Ms. Grande referred to her relationship with Mr. Miller as “toxic” and criticized those who attributed the accident to the breakup. “I have cared for him and tried to support his sobriety,” she wrote.
Malcolm McCormick was born on Jan. 19, 1992.  They and a brother are among his survivors.
Mr. Miller began rapping as a teenager and released several mixtapes before signing with Rostrum, a local independent label. He was an astute, intricate rapper; as a lyricist he was a classicist in an era that had largely turned away from that style.
But he was also lighthearted. “Blue Slide Park,” bounced from one jubilant song to the next in the party-rap tradition of the late 1980s and early ’90s. With his 2013 record, “Watching Movies With the Sound Off,” his music was becoming more serious and more technically accomplished.
He was a producer as well, sometimes under the alias Larry Fisherman, and his beats were lush and jazz-and-soul-inflected with flashes of sparkle. As a rapper, he landed hard in the pocket; as a producer, he gave himself deep pockets to land in.
Early in his career, Mr. Miller had a platinum-selling single with “Donald Trump” — “take over the world when I’m on my Donald Trump” — invoking the real-estate developer before his turn to politics. (Mr. Trump said at the time that he was proud of Mr. Miller but added that maybe the rapper “should pay me a lot of money.”) Mr. Miller later expressed regret over the song.
In 2012 his home studio in Los Angeles became a hub for a young generation of West Coast rappers, including members of the Odd Future collective. It was also the location for a comedic quasi-reality show, “Mac Miller and the Most Dope Family,” on MTV2.
But the wages of fame were taking their toll. By 2013 he was speaking publicly about his addiction, and his 2015 album “GO:OD AM” — his first on a major label, Warner Bros. — dealt with it explicitly. All five of his studio albums debuted in the Top 5 of the Billboard album chart. “Swimming” released last month, was his wooziest and most insular to date.
Mr. Miller was mourned across social media on Friday by friends and collaborators in the music industry, including Wiz Khalifa, Questlove, J. Cole and Chance the Rapper.
