BEVERLY HILLS, Calif. — On a quiet residential street in Beverly Hills, a spacious cream-colored house is occupied solely on weekdays, mostly by women in casual T-shirts or sundresses, with multiple ear piercings and arrays of gold chains around their necks.
Scattered around the house are what might best be described as bohemian tchotchkes: crystal bowls from various vacations, large rocks, feathers, small statues picked up at flea markets and a shrine filled with, among other things, vintage dollhouse teepees. Frequently a well-known actress or model will stop by, stay for a few hours and leave with a shopping bag in hand. The overall aesthetic — relaxed, free-spirited, upscale but not showy — parallels what’s designed and sold here.
The unmarked home is the headquarters of Jacquie Aiche, a jeweler whose luxe, hippie-skewed pieces are stocked at stores such as Saks Fifth Avenue and Le Bon Marché Rive Gauche, the Paris store that this month unveiled a pop-up department spotlighting Ms. Aiche’s work and has included it in a storewide initiative showcasing Los Angeles-based brands.
Her collection is also carried online at sites like Mytheresa, Shopbop and, since July, Net-a-Porter.
The pieces that Ms. Aiche (pronounced eye-EESH) and her team create are designed for informal wear — and layering, as Ms. Aiche did on a recent warm morning, teaming the pieces she described as her “second skin” (including several delicate anklets and a thin gold chain with diamonds that stretched around her neck, down her torso and around her waist) with loose Levi’s cutoff shorts and a spaghetti-strap T-shirt.
Although Ms. Aiche is definitely at the helm, she works closely with 15 design, marketing and sales employees, who she calls her JA Tribe. “There are so many people that come together,” she said. “Yes, I am Oz or Geppetto; I do orchestrate the whole thing, but there’s so much passion that comes from everybody that works here. That’s why I called it the JA Tribe — we’re a family here.” The label has become, perhaps inevitably, a frequent hashtag on the brand’s Instagram account.
Ms. Aiche’s best sellers include several styles of finger bracelets — fine gold chains, frequently detailed with diamonds, that connect one finger with the wrist — and what are called shaker earrings, with several diamonds or golden discs dangling from a hoop. Some items resemble talismans, including earrings adorned with diamond-studded eyes and a large turquoise scarab ring; others, such as a halter bra made of gold and diamonds and a large selection of items with a marijuana leaf motif, dubbed the Sweet Leaf collection, have a deliberately louche and provocative feel.
The primary collection, in 14-karat gold, is made mostly by Los Angeles-based artisans working from Ms. Aiche’s sketches and notes, and using gemstones like amethyst, green-gray opal, Indian ruby, labradorite and watermelon tourmaline.
Ms. Aiche, 42, grew up a few miles from her headquarters, in a home in the Hollywood Hills where her neighbors included the comedian Sam Kinison and Timothy B. Schmit of the Eagles. Creative and entrepreneurial as a child, by age 8 she was painting designs on small rocks and selling them to neighbors. She eventually enrolled in the Fashion Institute of Design & Merchandising in Los Angeles to study fashion design, but was distracted by other lessons she was taking, including jewelry making. “I was basically ditching class to take other courses at other schools because I wasn’t into school,” she recalled.
In 2008 she closed the boutique to focus on her collection, which was quickly picked up by tastemaker stores like Curve in West Hollywood, which still sells the line. At the time, she lived in what is now the brand headquarters and worked in the garage. As the business expanded, she moved to another home a short stroll away with her husband Ygal, who works for the brand, and their children Luca, 12, and Zoe, 9.
There’s a similar feeling at Ms. Aiche’s headquarters. The mostly female team eats lunch together every day in what Ms. Aiche called “the conference room” but actually is the backyard, furnished with a large brass table from the Rose Bowl Flea Market and comfortable chairs — a spot also used for snacks of vegan, gluten-free chocolate chip cookies from Erin McKenna’s Bakery, a short drive away, or an end-of-day glass of rosé or tequila.
Although the majority of the brand’s sales are generated by retailers, as many as 20 clients a day come to the house by invitation. (The company is privately owned; Ms. Aiche won’t reveal sales figures.) And in addition to the jewelry, there’s plenty to attract them. Sean Roth, who stops by periodically to pierce ears, nipples and other body parts, has a waiting list. In an upstairs bedroom, an aesthetician, Cynthia Marie Franco, does facials; yoga classes and meditative sound baths are offered regularly in another room. A few times a year, a shaman, Jon Rasmussen, comes in from Big Sur.
And just about every weekday a spiritual adviser, Sylvain Sellam, sees clients; Ms. Aiche offers the Blesslev collection of amulet necklaces that she and Mr. Sellam developed, each one accompanied by a mantra and a blessing.
Nonetheless, in a discreet spot on her website, there are images of admirers like Rihanna, Emily Ratajkowski and Gigi Hadid. And on Instagram, the tag #JacquieAiche pops up next to images of Blake Lively and Kendall Jenner.
