The following is a partial transcript of the interview with Judge Brett Kavanaugh, the Supreme Court nominee, and his wife, Ashley, on “The Story with Martha MacCallum.” The transcript was provided by Fox News and edited for length.
MARTHA MacCALLUM: Thank you both for sitting down with me today. What made you decide to speak out before the hearing on Thursday? Judge Kavanaugh?
JUDGE BRETT KAVANAUGH: I am looking for a fair process, a process where I can defend my integrity and clear my name. And all I’m asking for is fairness and that I’d be heard in this process.
MS. MacCALLUM: Ashley, what has this been like for you the past couple of weeks? I know you’ve had death threats and all kinds of things coming your way. What — how does that feel?
ASHLEY KAVANAUGH: This process is incredibly difficult. It’s harder than we imagined, and we imagined it might be hard. But at the end of the day, our faith is strong, and we know that we’re on the right path. And we’re just going to stick to it, so.
MS. MacCALLUM: So let me — let’s get in to some of these allegations, because you’ve responded to them in statements, but you haven’t had a chance to respond them — to them in a fuller way.
And Christine Ford is expected to testify on Thursday that you at a party in high school pinned her to a bed, held your hand over her mouth. She said she was afraid that she could inadvertently be killed at that moment.
 And then she had an opportunity to get away.
Now, she doesn’t remember the date and she doesn’t remember the place. But what she does remember that I just detailed, is very specific.
And other assault victims say that they’ve had similar memories where they remembered exactly what happened but they didn’t necessarily remember the events surrounding it. You have categorically denied that this happened. Did anything happen?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: No. I had never sexually assaulted anyone, not in high school, not ever. I’ve always treated women with dignity and respect.
MS. MacCALLUM: This Christine Ford, do you know her?
MS. MacCALLUM: You don’t remember ever being at parties with her ever?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I do not. And this is an allegation about a party in the summer of 1982 at a house near Connecticut Avenue and East-West Highway with five people present.
I was never at any such party. The other people who are alleged to be present have said they do not remember any such party. A woman who was present, another woman who was present who is Dr. Ford’s lifelong friend has said she doesn’t know me and never remembers being at a party with me at any time in her life.
MS. MacCALLUM: So, where do you think this is coming from? Why would she make this up?
MS. MacCALLUM: Let me ask Ashley, when this came out what did you say to your husband? Did you question him and have moments where you wondered if he was telling you the truth?
MS. KAVANAUGH: No. I know Brett. I’ve know him for 17 years. And this is not at all character; it’s really hard to believe. He’s decent, he’s kind, he’s good. I know his heart. This is not consistent with — with Brett.
She was initially uncertain it was you, they write in this piece, but after six days she’s confident enough, she says. Should the American people view her as credible?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I never did any such thing — never did any such thing. The other people alleged to be there don’t recall any such thing. If such as thing had a happened, it would’ve been the talk of campus. The women I knew in college and the men I knew in college said that it’s unconceivable that I could’ve done such a thing.
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: And yes, there were parties. And the drinking age was 18, and yes, the seniors were legal and had beer there. And yes, people might have had too many beers on occasion and people generally in high school — I think all of us have probably done things we look back on in high school and regret or cringe a bit, but that’s not what we’re talking about.
MS. MacCALLUM: So you’re saying that through all these years that are in question, you were a virgin?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: That’s correct.
MS. MacCALLUM: Never had sexual intercourse with anyone in high school?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: Correct.
MS. MacCALLUM: And through what years in college since we’re probing into your personally life here?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: Many years after. I’ll leave it at that.
MS. MacCALLUM: Sir, you are going to be pressed on something that you just said about people do things in high school, and you were all drinking, were there times when perhaps you drank so much — was there ever a time that you drank so much that you couldn’t remember what happened the night before?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: No, that never happened.
MS. MacCALLUM: You never said to anyone, “I don’t remember anything about last night”?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: No, that did not happen.
MS. MacCALLUM: Do you believe there should be an F.B.I. investigation into these allegations and that a pause should happen and, you know, sort it all out? If there’s nothing to worry about and nothing to hide, why not have that process, Ashley? And then I’ll ask you that, Brett.
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I mean, I’ve said all along and Ashley, too, I want to be heard. I was first interviewed last Monday, the day after the allegation appeared by the committee staff under penalty of felony, and I denied this categorically and unequivocally and I said twice during that, I said, “I want a hearing tomorrow,” last Tuesday, a week ago.
I want an opportunity — a fair process. America’s about fairness, I want a fair process where I can defend my integrity and clear my name as quickly as I can in whatever forum the Senate deems appropriate.
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: In America, we have fairness. We hear from both sides. I’ve spent my life in the judiciary, the — our judicial system, and part of the judicial systems as I’ve said during my first — my hearing was process protection. That’s what judges believe that’s what our system was built on, the rule of law, about fair process.
MS. MacCALLUM: Do you feel unprotected by the process?
MS. MacCALLUM: Right. Let me ask you this. Separately from these allegations, is it fair to judge someone on something they did before they were 18 years old? When they were 17 years old? Should anything they did then follow them later in life, or should it enter into any decisions made about them later in life?
MS. MacCALLUM: But separately from what you’re being accused of just as a judge, if you were looking at this case as a part of what you’re going through and someone said, “This person did that at 17 years old,” is it fair to judge them on something that when they’re in their 50s, 60s?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I think everyone is judged on their whole life. I’m a good person. I’ve led a good life. I’ve tried to do a lot of good for a lot of people. I am not perfect, I know that. None of us is perfect. I’m not perfect, but I’ve never, never done anything like this.
MS. MacCALLUM: So in terms of the process now and what happens now, when you look at how all of this — where all this generated from, do you have thoughts? Is this about Roe v. Wade? Is this about people who initially right off the bat said they wanted to see you never take the spot on the Supreme Court? Where’s all this coming from?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I just want a fair process where I can be heard.
MS. MacCALLUM: You don’t have any thoughts on what’s — where this is coming from?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I just want a fair process where I can be heard, defend my integrity, defend the integrity of my family. I’ve — I’m telling the truth.
MS. MacCALLUM: You don’t want to talk about where you think this is coming from?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I just want an opportunity, a fair process where I can defend my integrity.
MS. MacCALLUM: All right. Ashley how’s this spin for the girls, for your family? What have you guys — give us whatever window you feel comfortable saying about what this has been like for you as a family?
MS. KAVANAUGH: This — it’s very difficult. It’s very difficult these conversations with your children, which we’ve had to have some broader terms for our youngest. But they know Brett. And they know the truth. And we told them at the very beginning of this process this will be not fun sometimes. You’re going to hear things that, people feel strongly, and you need to know that. And just remember you know your dad.
MS. MacCALLUM: Did you guys ever look at each other and say: “I’m out, this is enough. This just isn’t worth it”?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I’m not going to let false accusations drive us out of this process. And we’re looking for a fair process where I can be heard and defend the — my integrity, my lifelong record — my lifelong record of promoting dignity and equality, starting with the women who knew me when I was 14 years old. I’m not going anywhere.
MS. MacCALLUM: Do you believe that President Trump is going to stand by you throughout?
JUDGE KAVANAUGH: I know he’s going to stand by me. He called me this afternoon, and he said he’s standing by me.
MS. MacCALLUM: All right. Thank you both very much. Good to speak with you today. Thanks for taking the time.
MS. KAVANAUGH: Thank you.