And I was there at the bitter end, when she gave her concession speech, standing among the sobbing aides and an ashen Bill Clinton.
If you had told me, on the day of that final speech, that Mrs. Clinton’s loss would ignite a national movement of women, millions who would attend marches and hundreds who would run for office, I wouldn’t have believed it.
Honestly, I probably would have laughed in your face.
During the Trump administration, women have flooded into politics in unprecedented numbers. One poll found that women made 86 percent of the calls to Congress in President Trump’s first few months in office. Research released a few months later found that 70 percent of the people in Democratic groups that have sprung up since the election are women. A record-breaking 257 women are now running for the House and Senate.
With the primaries complete, it seemed like a good time to take stock of this still-young movement.
I called up Kelly Dittmar, a political-science professor at the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers University, which has been tracking the number of women in politics for nearly 50 years.
As we reported last week, many of these women are running in districts that favor the other party — meaning that most will likely lose. “The expectations have been hyped,” Ms. Dittmar said. But, she quickly added, that doesn’t mean female candidates haven’t had an impact in other, perhaps less calculable ways.
• The pink wave is blue. This is largely a Democratic movement. By Ms. Dittmar’s count, only 60 of the women still running for Congress are Republican.
• Run like a woman. In 2008, following the prevailing wisdom, Mrs. Clinton downplayed her gender. Candidates today are embracing it. Kids roam the campaign trail. Some candidates breast-feed in their ads. And veterans, like Arizona’s Martha McSally, tout their barrier-breaking service.
• Making a #MeToo connection. In ads and speeches, candidates turned their own sexual abuse into an opportunity to relate to voters. Mary Barzee Flores, in Florida, tells voters about being groped by the night manager of a Pizza Hut as a teenager. Katie Porter, in California, has talked about surviving domestic abuse.
• Gender matters, even when all the candidates are women. There are 33 races where women are running against other women. Gender has been a factor in those races, too. And a reminder that women don’t vote as a monolithic block. “Gender is a dynamic whether or not the bodies are all female,” says Ms. Dittmar.
• Forget about parity. At the end of all this, women are still likely to be underrepresented. Even if all the female congressional candidates won (an almost impossible proposition), women would still make up less than half of the House and less than a third of the Senate.
Now, a question for our readers: Has the wave of female candidates impacted you personally? Perhaps changed your outlook on politics, or even spurred you to get involved? We’d love to hear from you! Let us know who you are, and how it has affected you, at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| The story around the Supreme Court confirmation of Brett M. Kavanaugh seems to be evolving all the time. So we chatted with Adam Liptak, who covers the Supreme Court for The Times, to get a sense of how things have changed.
On Politics: I remember hearing you say on The Daily a couple weeks ago that “short of some astounding revelation,” no one in the Senate would change their mind on Judge Kavanaugh. I imagine this qualifies as astounding?
Adam: It’s a very serious accusation. Were Christine Blasey Ford to testify and be thought credible by the public, Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination could be in peril.
And if she doesn’t testify?
If we do not hear from Dr. Blasey and no additional information surfaces, I suspect Judge Kavanaugh will soon be Justice Kavanaugh.
Are there any candidates you can remember whose nomination was derailed by a revelation like this?
One comes to mind. In 1987, President Ronald Reagan said he would nominate Judge Douglas H. Ginsburg to the Supreme Court. But after it emerged that he had smoked marijuana as a law professor at Harvard, Judge Ginsburg withdrew his name.
Let’s say Judge Kavanaugh is confirmed. What does that mean for the court? Would there be an expectation for him to recuse himself on certain cases?
Judge Kavanaugh is respected by the justices, and they would welcome him to the court. There’s no reason to expect him to recuse from any cases as a result of the recent accusation.
What happens if he doesn’t get confirmed?
After he withdrew, Judge Ginsburg went back to work at the federal appeals court in Washington on which Judge Kavanaugh serves. On the other hand, Judge Robert H. Bork stepped down from that court in 1988 after the Senate rejected his nomination. I’d expect Judge Kavanaugh to return to his court.
Facebook and other platforms have tried to cut down on misinformation, but there’s still a lot out there.
We decided to be more aggressive and proactive about this, in part by enlisting our readers. If you see deliberate disinformation on social media ahead of the midterms, you can now use this tip form to send it to us. We’ll investigate, and fold what we find into our coverage of the midterms.
If you spot something that you think might qualify, let us know here.
Want to feel smarter?
• Ice cores in the Alps trapped more than a thousand years of pollen. Using them, scientists can map the epidemics and environmental changes that shook Europe over the centuries. Read more here.
• In the digital age, does physical distance matter? The Times mapped the Facebook connections of millions of Americans. See how connected your community is.
• Some of our biggest cities and corporations have committed to 100 percent renewable energy. That has utility companies terrified. Read why in Vox.
How’s this for local politics? Judy B. Cochran, a great-grandmother and the newly elected mayor of Livingston, Tex., hunted down and shot a 580-pound alligator that she said had eaten one of her miniature horses.
“Don’t mess with Nana,” she told the Houston Chronicle.
