Sunday Review|Fury Is a Political Weapon. And Women Need to Wield It.
Fury Is a Political Weapon. And Women Need to Wield It.
What the testimony of Christine Blasey Ford and Brett Kavanaugh showed us about who gets to be angry in public.
Inside the room, in the morning, she spoke carefully, precisely, in a high voice; she made jokes about caffeine, asked deferentially about whether it would be O.K. to take a break. She acknowledged her terror, but remained calm, and cited her scientific expertise in how the brain responds to trauma.
Outside the room where Christine Blasey Ford was testifying on Thursday morning, women were incandescent with rage and sorrow and horror. They were getting angry in a new way, a public way, an unapologetic way — a way that is typically reserved for men, and that would again serve men well, when afternoon came.
But it’s not just sorrow mingled with our wrath; our impulse toward tears in moments of fury stems also from an instinct that things will go better for us tactically — especially if we are white, our perceived feminine fragility more easily discernible and likely to elicit sympathy within a white patriarchy — if we emote through tears, which are associated with women’s vulnerability, rather than through rage. Crying affirms many of us as female, and if you’re a woman, comporting yourself in traditionally female ways is rewarded, while lashing out is punished.
Whatever the connection, there’s been a lot of crying in politics, and very little of it has stemmed just from women’s feeling sad.
The next day, Ms. Ephron trailed Ms. Steinem out of a hotel where Ms. Steinem had gone to confront Mr. McGovern directly but hadn’t succeeded. “If you’re a woman, all they can think about your relationship with a politician is that you’re either sleeping with him or advising him about clothes,” Ms. Steinem seethed, and started to cry again.
It is a righteous diatribe, months and years of fury spilling over, and she can’t get it out without weeping.
Patricia Schroeder, then a Democratic congresswoman from Colorado, had worked with Gary Hart on his presidential runs. In 1987, when Mr. Hart was caught in an extramarital affair aboard a boat called Monkey Business and bowed out of the race, Ms. Schroeder, deeply frustrated, figured there was no reason she shouldn’t explore the idea of running for president herself.
“It was not a well-thought-out decision,” she said to me with a laugh 30 years later. “There were already seven other candidates in the race, and the last thing they needed was another one. Somebody called it ‘Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs.’” Because it was late in the campaign, she was behind on fund-raising, and so she vowed that she wouldn’t enter the race unless she raised $2 million. It was a losing battle. She discovered that some of her supporters who gave $1,000 to men would give her only $250. “Do they think I get a discount?” she wondered.
When she made her speech announcing that she would not launch a formal campaign, she was so overcome by emotions — gratitude for the people who’d supported her, frustration with the system that made it so difficult to raise money and to target voters rather than delegates, and anger at the sexism — that she got choked up.
For a while Ms. Schroeder kept what she called “a crying file,” a list of all the male politicians who’d wept publicly that year. “Reagan would tear up every time he saw a flag,” she remembered. Her file included John Sununu, who cried as he was stepping down as governor of New Hampshire, and George H.W. Bush, who was a steady weeper.
But the reaction to tears from those men was wholly different from what Ms. Schroeder got. “Saturday Night Live” ran a skit in which the actress playing Ms. Schroeder repeatedly burst into tears while moderating a debate.
No one would say it set men back, because most men are allowed to cry and yell the way Judge Kavanaugh did on Thursday. They are allowed to rant the way Lindsey Graham did. Their expressions of ire serve as a signal of their strength and power. This is how men get to behave, to emote, to communicate.
Slowly, women are beginning to behave that way too.
This political moment has provoked a period in which more and more women have been in no mood to dress their fury up as anything other than raw and burning rage. Many women are yelling, shouting, using Sharpies to etch sharply worded slogans onto protest signs, making furious phone calls to representatives.
Later, Ms. Archila told a reporter: “I wanted him to feel my rage.” Shortly afterward, Mr. Flake demanded that the F.B.I. investigate the accusations against Judge Kavanaugh before a floor vote.
Many of the women shouting now are women who have not previously yelled publicly before, many of them white middle-class women newly awakened to political fury and protest. Part of the process of becoming mad must be recognizing that they are not the first to be furious, and that there is much to learn from the stories and histories of the livid women — many of them not white or middle class — who have never had reason not to be mad.
If you are angry today, or if you have been angry for a while, and you’re wondering whether you’re allowed to be as angry as you feel, let me say: Yes. Yes, you are allowed. 
If you’ve been feeling a new rage at the flaws of this country, and if your anger is making you want to change your life in order to change the world, then I have something incredibly important to say: Don’t forget how this feels.
Tell a friend, write it down, explain it to your children now, so they will remember. And don’t let anyone persuade you it wasn’t right, or it was weird, or it was some quirky stage in your life when you went all political — remember that, honey, that year you went crazy? No. No. Don’t let it ever become that. Because people will try.
The future will come, we hope. If we survive this, if we make it better — even just a little bit better — the urgency will fade, perhaps the ire will subside, the relief may take you, briefly. And that’s good, that’s O.K.
But then the world will come and tell you that you shouldn’t get mad again, because you were kind of nuts and you never cooked dinner and you yelled at the TV and weren’t so pretty and life will be easier when you get fun again. 
What you’re angry about now — injustice — will still exist, even if you yourself are not experiencing it, or are tempted to stop thinking about how you experience it, and how you contribute to it. Others are still experiencing it, still mad; some of them are mad at you. Don’t forget them; don’t write off their anger. Stay mad for them, alongside them, let them lead you in anger.
Rebecca Traister (@rtraister) is a writer at large for New York magazine and the author, most recently, of “Good and Mad: The Revolutionary Power of Women’s Anger,” from which this essay is adapted.