A Netflix documentary explores the state of conversation around Roe v. Wade. And “The Oslo Diaries” revisits talks that led to the Oslo Accords.
REVERSING ROE (2018) on Netflix. With a vote on the nomination of Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court coming up, a question many Americans have been asking — with dread or hope — is what his presence on the court might mean for Roe v. Wade, the landmark Supreme Court ruling that established a constitutional right to abortion. This month, an email obtained by The New York Times showed that Judge Kavanaugh once challenged the accuracy of deeming the ruling “settled law of the land.” Consider it appropriate timing, then, that Netflix is releasing this documentary on the case and the way the issue of abortion continues to ignite passions. Reaching across ideological divides, the directors Ricki Stern and Annie Sundberg (“Marathon: The Patriots Day Bombing,” “Joan Rivers: A Piece of Work”) speak to figures including Gloria Steinem, the doctors Colleen McNicholas and Curtis Boyd, and the National Right to Life Committee president, Carol Tobias, to examine how the case and the issue are discussed (and argued over) in America in 2018, and how the country got there.
THE OSLO DIARIES (2018) 8 p.m. on HBO. The drama of the secret talks between the Palestine Liberation Organization and Israel in the early 1990s that led to the Oslo peace accords was high enough to carry a Broadway play last year. That should indicate that this documentary, which tries to build a comprehensive account of the talks through archival footage, diary entries and interviews, including with the former Israeli president and prime minister Shimon Peres, will be engrossing.
HARRY POTTER AND THE PRISONER OF AZKABAN (2004) 9 p.m. on Syfy. Alfonso Cuarón’s “Roma” won the top award at the 75th Venice International Film Festival on Saturday, and nowadays the director is a household name known most widely for his 2013 sci-fi smash, “Gravity.” But in 2004, Mr. Cuarón was a somewhat surprising choice to direct this third installment of the “Harry Potter” franchise, having been known best as the sexual provocateur behind “Y Tu Mamá También.” The resulting film, considerably darker than its predecessors, was, A. O. Scott wrote in his review for The Times, “surely the most interesting” of the first three Potter movies.