President Trump unleashed his latest criticism of Democrats, calling them “con artists” for their handling of the sexual misconduct accusations against Judge Brett Kavanaugh.
I think it’s horrible what the Democrats have done. It’s a con game they’re playing. They’re con — they’re really con artists. They’re trying to convince — you know they don’t, they don’t believe it themselves O.K. They know he’s a high-quality person. They don’t believe it. It’s just resist and obstruct. They’re playing a con game and they play it very well. They play it actually much better than the Republicans. Thirty-six years ago, nobody ever knew about it — nobody ever heard about it and now a new charge comes up. And she said, well it might not be him and there were gaps and she said she was totally inebriated and she was all messed up and she doesn’t know it was him, but it might have been him. Oh gee, let’s not make him a Supreme Court judge because of that. This is a con game being played by the Democrats.
UNITED NATIONS — President Trump accused Democrats on Tuesday of orchestrating “a con game” against Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh in hopes of stopping his confirmation to the Supreme Court and said that one of two women who have accused him of sexual misconduct as a student was “all messed up” and “drunk” at the time.
Lashing out as more stories emerge about Judge Kavanaugh’s youth, Mr. Trump dispensed with the restraint that advisers have urged him to exercise and adopted the attack mode he prefers. Much as other Republicans have increasingly done in recent days, he portrayed the allegations against Judge Kavanaugh as character assassination.
The president’s comments came as Senate Judiciary Committee Republicans said that they had retained an outside counsel to aid in Thursday’s hearing, when Judge Kavanaugh and his first accuser, Christine Blasey Ford, are scheduled to testify separately. The committee declined to identify the lawyer, who is a woman, citing safety concerns.
Dr. Blasey, who also goes by her married name, Ford, had sought to have senators question her rather than a lawyer. But mindful of the backlash after sharp questioning of Anita F. Hill during confirmation hearings for Justice Clarence Thomas in 1991, the all-male group of Republicans on the committee preferred to pass off the task to a professional and a woman.
“We have done it because we want to depoliticize the whole process, like the Democrats politicized the Anita Hill thing,” said Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Judiciary Committee chairman.
Mr. Grassley said the woman would also question Judge Kavanaugh, although it was unclear if she would be the only one on the Republican side to do so.
For most of the past couple weeks, Mr. Trump has stuck to the script of defending his nominee without directly attacking the women accusing him. In recent days, the president has at times gone further, explicitly questioning the credibility of Dr. Blasey, saying that if the sexual assault she described happening in the early 1980s “was as bad as she says,” she or her parents would have reported it to the authorities.
His comments on Tuesday, however, went further than before. Even as the president of Colombia sat next to him during what was supposed to be a diplomatic meeting between the two heads of state, Mr. Trump expressed aggravation and anger, taking on the latest accuser in more scathing and personal terms.
Without naming her, Mr. Trump singled out Deborah Ramirez, who said in an interview with The New Yorker published this week that Judge Kavanaugh exposed himself to her during a drinking party while they were students at Yale University.
Dr. Blasey has said that during a small high school party, a drunken Brett Kavanaugh pinned her to a bed, groped her, tried to remove her clothing and covered her mouth when she tried to scream. She said she escaped but never told anyone about it until decades later.
She could not remember with certainty when it took place or in whose house but said she believed it happened in the summer of 1982 when he was 17 and she was 15. The three other people she identified being in the house at the time, including one who was in the room at the time, have all said they do not recall any such incident and never saw Judge Kavanaugh mistreat women.
Republicans were trying to keep all of their members on board as the Thursday hearing approached. Senator Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, one of the Republicans on the fence, said her colleagues should not prejudge the allegations.
On the other hand, Senator Bob Corker, Republican of Tennessee, said he was not persuaded by Ms. Ramirez’s story.
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and a Judiciary Committee member who has expressed doubt about the accusations against Judge Kavanaugh, suggested that his confirmation could be voted on by this weekend. “He’s going to get confirmed,” Mr. Hatch predicted, according to CNN.