Readers and listeners, I hope you’ll spend some time this weekend with a feature I’m so proud of. I asked our writers and editors and some special guests — Esa-Pekka Salonen, Caroline Shaw, Nico Muhly, Daniil Trifonov and Julia Wolfe, to name just a few — to pick the five minutes that they would play to make someone fall in love with classical music.
The results were wide-ranging: most off the beaten path (Beethoven’s mournful Seventh and the triumphant “Firebird” finale notwithstanding), but all accessible in the best sense. Here is a playlist of all the choices, but you’ll want to read the story for everyone’s explanations of their selections.
And Corinna da Fonseca-Wollheim wrote about a pianist’s project to rediscover the surprisingly quirky works of Anton Reicha — mostly known (if he’s known at all) from the footnotes of biographies of Beethoven, who he knew as a teenager.
Piano fans, rejoice in two wonderful new recordings. Vikingur Olafsson, who made his Deutsche Grammophon debut last year with an album of Philip Glass études, has come out with a sweeping collection of works by (and inspired by) Bach. And Leif Ove Andsnes has brought his trademark clarity and thoughtfulness to a collection of Chopin Nocturnes and the four looming Ballades.
Mr. Olafsson’s Glass album was a revelation, with harmonic discoveries in works that often resist musicality. In his new recording, he has similarly plumbed the polyphonic depths of Bach’s preludes and fugues, as well as a handful of other small pieces, including arrangements of Bach by Rachmaninoff and Busoni. He manages to surprise even in the most familiar works, taming the different voices with authority while allowing room for adventurous turns — a blend of respect and audaciousness that makes for a refreshing addition to the crowded field of Bach recordings.
One of the best new recordings of this Leonard Bernstein centennial year has just been released by Deutsche Grammophon: Simon Rattle conducting the Berlin Philharmonic, with the pianist Krystian Zimerman as soloist, in a pulsing and impetuous account of the Symphony No. 2, “The Age of Anxiety,” recorded live in June. The symphony, written in 1949 and revised in 1965, takes its title from an Auden poem about four lonely friends who have an all-night rap session about life at a New York bar. This nearly-40-minute score, in two parts, is in effect a piano concerto, with a fearsomely difficult solo part. Whole stretches of the music infuse elements of jazz with a modernist language spiked with 12-tone riffs. With brilliant technique and rhapsodic daring, Mr. Zimerman gives a stunning performance.
