Asia Pacific|India Gay Sex Ban Is Struck Down. ‘Indefensible,’ Court Says.
India Gay Sex Ban Is Struck Down. ‘Indefensible,’ Court Says.


 Changing a law is one thing — changing deeply held mind-sets another. And few suggested that other major victories, like same-sex marriage, were on the near horizon.
Many Indians are extremely socially conservative, going to great lengths to arrange marriages with the right families, of the right castes. Loved ones who try to rebel are often ostracized. Countless gays have been shunned by their parents and persecuted by society.
Just to file the legal challenge that led to Thursday’s ruling was an act of bravery. The more than two dozen petitioners, who included gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender people, could have been rounded up and arrested simply for identifying themselves as gay and coming forward.
On Thursday, conservative Christians, Muslims and Hindus, who often find themselves at odds with one another, blasted the ruling as shameful and vowed to fight it.
“We are giving credibility and legitimacy to mentally sick people,” said Swami Chakrapani, president of All India Hindu Mahasabha, a conservative group.
Gay activists said they needed to move carefully. The next step, they said, will be to push for more equality in the workplace. 
The justices seemed moved by the stories they heard from the petitioners about harassment, blackmail, abuse and persecution.
As the justices spoke, the crowd in the courtroom tried to remain composed. Outside, a cheer went up and people hugged.

In hearings in July, lawyers argued that the law was out of sync with the times and legally inconsistent with other recent court rulings, including one made last year that guaranteed the constitutional right to privacy.
They pointed to similar hoary laws that had been toppled in the United States, Canada, England and Nepal, India’s smaller and poorer neighbor. And they went beyond classic legal arguments.
Ms. Guruswamy spoke of the decades-long relationship between two older petitioners, Navtej Singh Johar and Sunil Mehra, and the sacrifices they had made in their personal and professional lives to keep their partnership secret.
Ms. Guruswamy encouraged the judges to think of all the young gay people who did not want to follow that same road and spend their lives hiding who they really were.
Interestingly, India’s leading politicians, who usually never resist an opportunity to weigh in on a hot issue, have mostly stayed out of the debate.
Prime Minister Narendra Modi has said very little about gay rights, despite the conservative stance of his governing Bharatiya Janata Party on many social issues. The central government announced in July that it was not going to take a position on Section 377.
It was some of India’s Christian groups that put up the most aggressive defense of the law. Lawyers for these groups argued that sexual orientation was not innate and that decriminalizing gay sex would lead to the transmission of H.I.V.
Prosecution under the law was relatively rare. In 2014, 1,148 complaints were filed. In 2016, the number nearly doubled, to 2,187. That year, over 1,600 cases were sent for trial.
Many gays feared that if they reported crimes like rape, they would be the ones arrested. 
For several years, Section 377 was in the cross hairs, with the courts going back and forth.
 They regrouped and began looking for people willing to serve as petitioners and endure the personal scrutiny the case would bring. 
The initial group of petitioners in the latest challenge included Mr. Johar, a dancer, and his partner, Mr. Mehra, a journalist; Ritu Dalmia, a celebrity chef; Ayesha Kapur, a businesswoman; and Aman Nath, a hotelier.
As the Supreme Court prepared to hear the case, more than 25 other Indians with varied social and economic backgrounds joined them.
Among those to file a petition was Anurag Kalia, 25, an engineer living in Bangalore, who was once so afraid to say the word “gay” that he practiced doing so in front of the mirror.
“I used to whisper it,” he said.
