She thought she knew what she was about. The heroine of a sensational and successful novel, “Democracy,” published anonymously in 1880, Madeleine Lee, who is young, rich and beautiful, moves from New York to Washington to pass a season in a house on Lafayette Square.
And see them she did. The novel that tells her story is an entertaining tale of manners and an important meditation on democracy and its discontents — a narrative about politics that resonates even now, nearly 140 years after its first appearance. It is a reflection on corruption within the political class, but, read carefully, it also reinforces an ancient view that those who are disgusted with republican government need to remember that the fault, as Cassius in Shakespeare’s “Julius Caesar” remarked, lies not in the stars, but in ourselves.
As he worked on his monumental histories of the early Republic, Adams took time to write “Democracy,” a novel that one might have expected if Anthony Trollope and Ward Just had somehow managed to collaborate across time and space. Mrs. Lee, a widow and an idealist about public life, is a desirable catch. Two suitors are especially drawn to her: John Carrington, an aristocratic young Virginian, and the practical and ambitious Senator Silas Ratcliffe, a rising man from Illinois.
Mrs. Lee has no such epiphany. She is not obtuse. (“Ah, Mr. Carrington,” she says at one point, “this world will not run as we want. Do you suppose the time will ever come when every one will be good and happy and do just what they ought?”) Yet she prefers to abandon an arena she finds morally suspect to remaining in the fight that Nathan Gore had described to her.
Readers of Adams’s “Democracy” are left in a curious conundrum as the novel closes. We are to approve of Mrs. Lee’s rejection of Ratcliffe and of her retirement from Washington while understanding that Ratcliffe has what the historian Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr. described as “the more powerful arguments.” Schlesinger, himself a figure in the Adams tradition, added: “As a novel of political ideas, ‘Democracy’ is intermittently brilliant but ultimately unsatisfactory.” The same, alas, can — must, really — be said of democracy itself.