Theater|Plunder My Songbook, Bob Dylan Said. So He Did.
Plunder My Songbook, Bob Dylan Said. So He Did.
Bob Dylan’s fans may cherish his original recordings, but we all love a good cover version, if only as grist for arguments over who does him better. PJ Harvey or Madeleine Peyroux? Bryan Ferry or Cassandra Wilson? Hendrix or Harrison? Nico or Cat Power?
We might think of Conor McPherson’s new play with music, “Girl From the North Country” (starting previews at the Public Theater) as a kind of theatrical cover version. It’s certainly not a “jukebox” musical, though it weaves more than 20 Dylan songs into an original play set in northern Minnesota during the Depression.
While those are roughly the time and place of Mr. Dylan’s birth, this is not a bio-musical, like the Carole King show, “Beautiful,” either. And it’s definitely not a dance-ical, à la Twyla Tharp’s misbegotten Dylan anthology, “The Times They Are a-Changin,’” on Broadway in 2006.
Instead, the multicharacter drama Mr. McPherson has written, the first original work by this Irish playwright that is set in America, represents a sidelong route into Mr. Dylan’s musical and cultural roots.
The idea arose after Mr. Dylan’s management team, which was soliciting proposals for theatrical projects featuring his song catalog, approached Mr. McPherson. A Dylan admirer who’s since become a superfan, Mr. McPherson contributed a two-page pitch that didn’t just win approval, but also got him carte blanche.
From the time of the show’s creation for the Old Vic in London — which led to a hit run on the West End last year — until now, Mr. McPherson has had no contact with Mr. Dylan except through intermediaries, who have granted him license to use any song in the catalog, however he wants.
How did Mr. McPherson — whose plays include “The Weir,” “The Seafarer” and “Shining City” — choose which songs to include and where, and how have they been adapted? I talked to him and his collaborators about a prime selection on a break from rehearsal at the Public, where the show opens on Oct. 1.
The characters in the boardinghouse where “Girl From the North Country” unfolds aren’t lifted from, or directly inspired by, any of Mr. Dylan’s songs. But Joe Scott, an African-American boxer apparently on the run from the law, can’t help evoking the case of Rubin Carter, known as the Hurricane, the middleweight boxer whose wrongful conviction for murder and subsequent imprisonment were the subject of this rousing Dylan protest song from 1976.
In the show, it also serves as a sort of ensemble dance number after a tipsy Thanksgiving dinner. For Sydney James Harcourt, who plays Joe, the song’s celebratory staging is pointedly at odds with its message of disenfranchisement.
“I did not follow him down that path, and I didn’t own a copy of ‘Saved’ for years,” Mr. Eustis said, referring to another of Mr. Dylan’s Christian albums.
For Mr. McPherson — a nonreligious person whose plays nevertheless relentlessly circle supernatural themes, and who said that “a lot of the time, I’m writing a kind of Nativity play” — Mr. Dylan’s Christian period is a great source of inspiration.
Mr. Harcourt said he saw “Slow Train” as both cautionary and hopeful — though not too hopeful.
The only real Dylan hit Mr. McPherson selected (unless you count a few repurposed lines of “Make You Feel My Love”) is sung by Elizabeth, the boardinghouse proprietor’s wife, who suffers from some kind of dementia but isn’t as mentally absent as she often appears.
That sympathetic reading of the song’s chorus would seem to depart from the sneering effrontery of Mr. Dylan’s vocal delivery. Indeed, that “mountain of an iconic recording,” as Mr. McPherson put it, has made this “the hardest song to figure out how to present” in both productions.
“It’s kind of been taken apart and put back together,” she observed.
Another song that Mr. McPherson and Mr. Hale have stripped and reassembled is this glossy pop ditty from the less than beloved 1985 album “Empire Burlesque” (with a positively bonkers music video directed by Paul Schrader), here transformed into a soulful, stately lament, with choral backup, for Marianne, the black adopted daughter of the white couple who run the boardinghouse.
Singing the exact notes, though, risks losing another element of the original. As Mr. McPherson put it, the throwaway quality of Mr. Dylan’s vocals means that the song “is not needy, it’s very strong.” Might a heartfelt, on-pitch rendition cramp that style?
“No, because what he actually sings in the verses is so impossible to understand that it escapes the neediness — he doesn’t really seem to be asking for anything,” said Mr. McPherson, citing the song’s hallucinatory images (a guilty undertaker, the Queen of Spades, a dancing child).
To put it another way: Something is happening, but you do know what it is.