But Bobby himself, always somewhat recessive, was now vanished entirely. The ambivalent bachelor ringed by married couples haranguing him to settle down has been replaced by a female Bobbie, played by Rosalie Craig and catapulted into the 21st century, in a radical makeover that has given this show, long beloved critically, the sudden sheen of potential commerciality.
Women, after all, buy the vast majority of theater tickets, and unmarried ones have become a larger and increasingly vocal portion of the population.
The new “Company” is the latest in a wave of gender-conscious reconsiderations of well-established musicals, “My Fair Lady” and “Oklahoma!” among them, with the advantage that Mr. Sondheim was around to offer his blessing, and his help.
Drier than a sauvignon blanc, more New York than the Yankees, “Company” has, since its initial run, assumed an important if slightly veiled berth in the Sondheim canon. A consummate ensemble piece lacking a movie adaptation — though Furth, who died in 2008, wrote a two-page treatment for one that Ms. Elliott said had helped inform her interpretation — it is not a household name like “Into the Woods” or “Sweeney Todd.” The title, a somewhat dated synonym for guests, neatly conjures the insularity of a theatrical troupe.
And yet thanks to YouTube and the high-octane striving of Elaine Stritch, who originated the role of Bobby’s jaded friend Joanne, a documentary made by D.A. Pennebaker of the original cast album recording session has gathered a cult following of Gen Xers and millennials, inspiring a 2013 parody, “One’s Company,” and another scheduled to air on the Independent Film Channel next year.
Encapsulating the seesawing ennui and excitement of city life, numbers such as “The Ladies Who Lunch,” which was explicitly tailored for Stritch, and “Another Hundred People” have become cabaret classics.
The show is cherished in the West End, where, under Hal Prince’s direction, it played at Her Majesty’s Theater for 344 performances in 1972. It was revived by Sam Mendes at the Donmar Warehouse in 1995, with an African-American Bobby, Adrian Lester. The latter production captivated Mr. Harper, a single father who first thought of a female Bobby after repeatedly listening to the character’s signature ballad, “Being Alive,” after the premature birth of his twins via a surrogate.
The conversion of Amy to Jamie has also enabled the new “Company” to integrate a gay story line that many long suspected was subtextual, if not central; why else, it was wondered back in the day, would Bobby be facing down his 35th birthday still a bachelor?
The show’s creators long denied this possibility, and though Mr. Sondheim explored the concept of an all-male cast with the director John Tiffany in 2013, a banner year for marriage equality, the project was ultimately vetoed.
This is not the first time he has tweaked “Company” to reflect changing mores. The rhyme “bag/fag” in “You Could Drive a Person Crazy,” common lingo in 1970, became “away/gay” in the 1990s. More complicated was the entire transposition of this pastiche number, originally sung by a trio of Bobby’s girlfriends, for a trio of Bobbie’s boyfriends.
Technological developments have also affected the update of “Company,” arguably the first significant musical of the Information Age. The opening bars of the original cast recording are overlaid with a telephone’s busy signal, a sound unintelligible to digital natives who have the beep of Call Waiting, if they make conversation over a receiver at all.
The show’s strongest tether to the past other than Mr. Sondheim himself is Patti LuPone, reinhabiting the role of Joanne, a functioning alcoholic, that she previously performed in a 2011 concert version with the New York Philharmonic, directed by Lonny Price and starring Neil Patrick Harris as Bobby.
Ms. LuPone also knew Stritch, a proto-Bobbie herself, who remained unmarried until she was in her late 40s, inspired at least one of the one-act vignettes that were the basis for “Company” and regularly discussed with Furth the twinned aggravation and appeal of living alone.
Could this once-most-masculine of musicals, conceived by the boys’ club of Furth, Prince and Sondheim, possibly flourish in the #MeToo era as a declaration of … sisterhood?
Ms. Craig, who previously played one of Bobby’s girlfriends, Marta (now P.J.), in a Sheffield Crucible version of “Company,” is radiant with the possibility. “I genuinely feel as if it’s a new show,” she said.
Preparing for the lead part, she said she’d gone out and bought “a whole stack of books about females — where we fit now in society, what we want out of careers, singledom.
