Diminutive bonnethead sharks are the first omnivorous sharks known to science, which could change our understanding of what some sharks eat.
Sharks are not known for their taste for greenery. But at least one species of shark enjoys a salad of sea grass as well as the prey it hunts.
The bonnethead shark, a diminutive species that reaches up to 3 feet in length, lives in the shallow sea grass meadows off both coasts of the Americas. It eats small squid and crustaceans ferreted from the swaying underwater fronds. But, researchers who have carefully monitored everything going in and out of captive bonnetheads say in a study published in Proceedings of the Royal Society B that they also eat large quantities of seagrass. The grass isn’t just passing inertly through the sharks’ guts. They extract nutrition from it just as they do from the meaty portion of their diet. These sharks must, therefore, be reclassified as omnivores — the first omnivorous sharks known to science.
In 2007, researchers first reported that the digestive tracts of bonnethead sharks caught in the Gulf of Mexico were full of sea grass, up to 62 percent of the contents by weight.
At the time, some reasoned that the grass might have been ingested incidentally, as the sharks dove for scurrying prey in the meadows. But Samantha Leigh, a graduate student at the University of California, Irvine, and lead author of the paper, and her colleagues wondered whether there was more to it.
They caught bonnethead sharks just off the Florida Keys and transported them to an outdoor lab facility. There, the sharks lived in a large tank and received a meal every day consisting of a wad of seagrass wrapped in a piece of squid, resembling a large inside-out sushi roll. The sea grass, which made up 90 percent of the roll, had been loaded with a tracker isotope that could be detected later in their blood if the grass was truly being digested, not just passing through. The researchers also filtered the sharks’ feces from the water using a fine mesh, allowing them to test how much of what went in came out.
The sharks thrived on this diet, all of them gaining weight during the experiment. When the researchers checked their blood, they found very high levels of the tracker, indicating the grass was being digested and used for nutrients. Checking enzymes in their guts revealed that the sharks do possess enzymes needed for breaking down the carbohydrates in plants, much like other omnivores; carnivores, on the other hand, have primarily enzymes for dealing with proteins. The researchers calculated that the sharks were digesting the grass with about 50 percent efficiency, much greater than carnivorous lizards, for instance, whose efficiency at digesting plant matter is about 30 percent.
In fact, the sharks had roughly the same digestive efficiency as juvenile sea-grass-eating sea turtles, which start out as omnivores and become more like herbivores as they mature.
“They are at least as good as those guys. That was pretty surprising to see,” said Ms. Leigh. How do humans compare? “We’re actually in the same realm as the bonnethead shark,” she said, good omnivores that we are.
Going forward, the researchers hope to understand why the shark has this ability. Humans get our plant-digesting enzymes from our gut microbiome, and it seems likely the sharks do as well, though that has yet to be confirmed. Understanding that the bonnethead eats plants also changes its status in ecological models of the seagrass meadow ecosystem, an important tool for conservation.
Could it be that other sharks have been grazing on grass all this time?
