The New York Philharmonic’s declaration of its new-music bona fides this season is so emphatic, it’s being delivered with megaphones.
In Ashley Fure’s “Filament,” which has its premiere on Thursday in the Philharmonic’s season-opening gala — the first under its new music director, Jaap van Zweden — singers are spread throughout David Geffen Hall, armed with bespoke megaphones that create body-shaking sounds.
Mr. Tao, 24, has long been admired by Mr. van Zweden, who commissioned works from him as music director of the Dallas Symphony Orchestra and Hong Kong Philharmonic. (“It’s actually how I kind of learned to write for orchestra,” Mr. Tao said in an interview of those earlier pieces, which he worked on when he was as young as 17.) Mr. van Zweden hasn’t worked with Ms. Fure before, but he has warmed to the idiosyncratic demands of her music.
This perspective — looking at music as something physical — is at the heart of much of Ms. Fure’s work, which deals in sound environments more than melodic lines. “Filament” is no exception.
Mr. van Zweden leads the orchestra in its typical configuration. But there are also three amplified soloists on elevated platforms: a trumpet (Nate Wooley) at the back of the stage, a bass (Brandon Lopez) to one side of the front and a bassoon (Rebekah Heller) in the audience. Then there are so-called “moving voices,” members of the Constellation Chor holding megaphones, scattered throughout the concert hall.
The soloists at times play with a credit card, a metal sheet or, in Ms. Heller’s case, the slap of a tongue against the bassoon’s bocal. Musicians in the orchestra sometimes use pencils and wooden skewers (“meat sticks,” Mr. van Zweden called them in rehearsal).
Pulling this off has required more resources than the Philharmonic’s usual program opener. In addition to the guest artists, “Filament” has a team of light and costume designers, and each of the megaphones was custom-made by Matter Design.
“Everything Must Go” is a curtain raiser for Bruckner’s Eighth Symphony — in fact, the symphony will follow the new piece without pause. That transition, or lack thereof, was decided before Mr. Tao got the commission. Indeed, he says he didn’t really know Bruckner’s music before the Philharmonic tapped him.
An excerpt from Conrad Tao’s demo of the work.
“I learned to really appreciate Bruckner,” Mr. Tao said, adding that living with the 19th-century Austrian composer’s notoriously divisive music changed the way he listens to it.
Mr. Tao will return to Bruckner on Sept. 28 as part of Nightcap, a new Philharmonic series of late-night concerts hosted by the violist Nadia Sirota at the Kaplan Penthouse. The only direction he received was for his program to be related to the orchestra’s, so he decided to take inspiration from the religious, ritualistic aspects of Bruckner’s music, with guests including the choreographer and tap dancer Caleb Teicher.
