You’ll need yours about you to tackle this Andrew J. Ries construction.
SATURDAY PUZZLE — Today’s fun and challenging grid by Andrew J. Ries is pretty blatantly draped on one newfangled seed entry running down the center. That’s perfectly fine; it is surrounded by tricky fill and the trendiness of the seed makes the puzzle more interesting. We need to adapt to survive, people! The puppy filter makes it all worth it.
I’m sure that people will get tripped up by some of the little guys today: I had “lox” for EEL (and am still aghast at its cluing) and “top” for SAT. I loved FERRIS, OTIS, R AND D, and TIP, among others.
18A: There were two sports references in this puzzle that were new to me, here and at 32A. This entry, TAXI SQUAD, has been in the puzzle once before, pretty recently; 32A is a debut. What do they mean by “taxi?” Glad you asked!
The Cleveland Browns football team was founded in 1944 by a newspaper, real estate and taxicab tycoon, Arthur B. McBride, after he was rebuffed in an effort to purchase the N.F.L.’s Rams (which was a Cleveland team back then). In order to maximize the value of practice players, the walk-on-type guys who wanted a spot on the roster but were mostly just used when the team worked out and prepared for the football season, Mr. McBride had them drive his cabs as well.
32A: This had to be an arena or something, so I got DOME pretty fast. “Florida” fit for a long time and kept me on the wrong track in the upper left corner (blocking the cleverly clued AREA RUG, for one). This entry is the GEORGIA DOME, which is no longer; it cost $214 million to build, opened in 1992, seated over 71,000 people and got demolished and replaced in 2017 by the $1.6 billion Mercedes-Benz Stadium, which also seats about 71,000 people. Hopefully those people are getting significantly more enjoyment from their fancy new stadium!
54A: So, the way this is clued you might think that we’re dealing with some kind of egomaniac being on the cover of every issue of his or her own magazine for 18 years, but it’s not: It’s Oprah! She does it only because she knows what’s best. The periodical is called O MAGAZINE because all you do while you read it is say, “O, yeah!” I miss Oprah Winfrey.
62A: Does anyone else remember the story, almost exactly a year ago, about the little girl in Cornwall, England, who supposedly found the sword Excalibur at the bottom of a lake? This isn’t that. This is a hotel in Las VEGAS. They have dinner jousting, though.
7D: I precede these generations that use virtual social tools (like this entry) to connect, and I didn’t see any of it coming, either. I skulked around with my ratty paperbacks feeling cooler than but vaguely intimidated by the bright-eyed future kids who had modems at home and built their own computer-based systems that were able to converse with people around the world.
SNAPCHAT FRIENDS are a modern evolution of this; Snapchat is an extremely free-form app that you can use to quickly float content out to the general audience or particular people. One of its original hooks was its ephemerality, the assurance that whatever you created lasted only a short period before vanishing into the ether, unlike other platforms like Facebook, where videos and photos of debauchery or whatever else come back to haunt you.
Another thing that’s made Snapchat popular is its use of augmented reality, such as the aforementioned “puppy filter” and any number of “lenses” that distort what you're seeing.
33D: At first, because of our sans serif typography, I wondered if this clue — “III in Ithaca” — was referring to the condition, ill, or the number, three. Not to mention Ithaca as in Cornell University’s hometown, or the Greek island. Turns out there is a third option, pronounced “aye aye aye;” a series of three Greek IOTAS.
41D: Here’s a refreshingly original clue that recalls a pre-augmented reality era! Back in the ’30s and ’40s, there were thousands of ice cream parlors in the U.S., staffed by “soda jerks” who created sundaes, fizzes, frappés and FLOATS.
This puzzle started with 7-Down and 37-Across, and I like how the rest of the central stagger came together. I remember that episode of “Seinfeld” where Kramer is a SEAT FILLER at the Tonys; the typical shenanigans ensue.
I decided against the pangram twice while writing this grid. Just needing a W to complete the pangram, I didn’t think WAV at 56-Down was worth it. And so, resignedly, I changed my original 22-D PANGRAM to TANGRAM.
Is your error log bringing you down?
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.