1. Graph A and Graph B (below) originally appeared elsewhere on NYTimes.com. We will reveal the original article on Thursday afternoon.
What are you curious about that comes from what you notice in these graphs?
• What might be going on in these graphs?
Write a catchy headline that captures the main ideas of the graphs. If your headline makes a claim, tell us what you noticed that supports your claim.
The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order. Start with “I notice,” then “I wonder,” and end with “The story these graphs are telling is ….” and a catchy headline.
3. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.
On Wednesday our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time to help students’ understanding go deeper. You might use their responses as models for your own.
4. On Thursday afternoon, we will reveal more information about the graphs at the bottom of this post. Students, we encourage you to post an additional comment after reading the reveal. How does the original New York Times article and the moderators’ comments help you see the graphs differently? Try to incorporate the statistical terms defined in the Stat Nuggets in your response.
• Read our introductory post, which includes information about using the “Notice and Wonder” teaching strategy.
• Learn about how and why other teachers are using this feature, and use the 2018-19 “What’s Going On in This Graph?” calendar to plan ahead for the 25 Wednesday releases.
• Go to the A.S.A. K-12 website, which includes This is Statistics, resources, professional development, student competitions, curriculum, courses and careers.
Have you ever seen a time series displayed on a dotplot or a bar graph? That is what we discussed this week. We looked at two graphs: Graph A, displaying the number of hurricanes that made landfall for 1900 - 2017, and Graph B, displaying the total cost for major natural disasters for 1980 - 2017. These two graphs tell a story about the number and resulting effect of natural disasters in the United States.
The graphs came from the New York Times article “The Places in the U. S. Where Disaster Strikes Again and Again.” In the original article, they are accompanied by maps for the years 2002 - 2017 of losses from major U. S. natural disasters by ZIP code. When taken together, we wonder what additional stories could be told?
■ What factors affect the total costs of natural disasters? Which of these factors have been increasing over time and why?
■ Two very stunning factoids are included in the article: 1) Only 4 percent of all hurricanes that make landfall globally hit in the United States. 2) About 90 percent of the total losses across the United States occurred in ZIP codes that contain less than 20 percent of the national population.
With these factoids and what you have noticed in the graphs, what additional conjectures do you have?
■ The number of hurricanes per year was displayed using a time series graph. There’s another way that this information could have been displayed. With the number of hurricanes (0 - 7) on the x-axis, make a dotplot by marking the frequency of that number over the past 117 years. At 3 hurricanes, is 2017 unusual? Explain.
■ If you have lived in an area that has had a natural disaster, what is your reaction to these graphs?
Below in the Stat Nuggets, we define and explain mathematical terms that apply to these graphs. Look into the archives to see past Stat Nuggets.
Thank you for participating in “What’s Going On in This Graph?”, which is intended to help you think more critically about graphs and the underlying data. Critical thinking is an essential element of statistics, the science of learning from data. Data visualizations, like these graphs, are an important part of statistics. They help us to understand and learn from data.
Keep noticing and wondering. We continue to welcome your responses.
Join us Wednesday, Sept. 26 to notice and wonder about a one-trillion-dollar graph. Hope to see your responses 9 a.m. - 2 p.m. Eastern time when we moderate online.
A time series graph displays a series of successive quantitative data points over a time period, which is usually divided into equal intervals. It shows how some variable varies over time.
In the hurricanes Graph A, the total number of hurricanes for each year is displayed as stacked dots, each stack representing a different year’s data. In the total losses Graph B, the datapoint for each year is displayed by a bar, with stacked bars for 2005 and 2017 highlighting specific large disasters.
Variability describes the degree to which values in a quantitative dataset vary from the average, or more generally, from each other. Outliers are values that are far away from average.
In the hurricanes Graph A, there is great variability from year-to-year with no particular pattern in the number of hurricanes. 1985 is the only year that has 7 hurricanes, but this is not significantly out of pattern. In the total losses Graph B, there is also great variability, though it seems that losses may be increasing. 2005 and 2017 seem to be outliers.
The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms. Hessney writes the “reveal” and Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, a professor at Waynesburg University in Pennsylvania. Ms. Chauvet moderated online with Leigh Nataro, a mathematics teacher at Kent Place School in Summit, New Jersey.