At his father’s workshop in remote Vermont, a solitary woodworker preserves the craft of building an American symbol.
SOME SYMBOLS OF America’s complex origins — Columbus Day, Andrew Jackson on the $20 bill, statues of Confederate generals — haven’t aged well, but the Windsor chair, preferred seating of the founding fathers, remains enshrined as an object of beauty and desire.
At once delicate and substantial, the Windsor is named after the town in England where it was first distributed in the early 18th century, but it’s considered to have been perfected by craftsmen in New York, Philadelphia and New England a few decades later. Among carpenters and collectors, a Windsor built in the traditional manner, without power tools and from freshly cut, undried “green” wood — whether finished 200 years ago or last week by one of a handful of living masters — is worthy of awe. Making such a chair, with its carved seat, pencil-thin spindles, turned legs and absence of right angles, is the amateur woodworker’s Moby Dick. Although there have been factory-made versions since the early years of industrialization, a handmade one is so different that it can be spotted, even by a layman, at a glance.
A SINGLE CHAIR takes George a full week, six hours a day, to build. The wood is cut locally, sometimes from trees on the 60-acre property, and he keeps it in whole logs so it stays moist; when he is ready to use it, he splits it with an iron wedge. Each component of a Windsor requires a different tensile strength, so he uses three kinds of timber: butternut for the seat, white oak for the spindles and cherry for the legs. George keeps their distinct grains intact; traditionally Windsors were painted black or green to hide differences in the woods, but buyers in recent years have come to embrace the mix.
So compelling is the idea of creating a Windsor that George now hosts a weeklong workshop each month. A handful of pilgrims — often just-retired guys or young Brooklynites — stay in the large wooden yurt he built a few hundred yards from the house; it’s commodious for such a structure, with plumbing, a cooktop and a washing machine. As the students spend their days under George’s tutelage, with tools that haven’t changed in centuries and about a dozen chairs hanging overhead from the rafters like piñatas, he makes his own beside them, smoothly shaving, planing and scraping the wood with graceful, syncopated movements. Building a Windsor, he says, is like constructing a bridge — both are dynamic structures that must bear up under shifting weight. His made-to-order chairs (which start at $1,200) are guaranteed for life.
