We shouldn’t allow the questions raised about the nominee in his first hearing to be submerged by the onrushing tide of scandal.
The explosive, late-arising allegations of sexual misconduct threatening to derail Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh’s confirmation to the Supreme Court make it natural to point to the parallel between the present moment and Anita Hill’s charges against Judge Clarence Thomas 27 years ago.
In both cases, the confirmation hearings ended on schedule before members of the Senate Judiciary Committee found themselves unexpectedly in session again to hear allegations against the nominees, in Judge Thomas’s case, that he sexually harassed Ms. Hill.
But this eerie parallel, separated by a generation of cultural change — or perhaps it will turn out to be only presumed change or wished-for change — is not the perspective from which I want to compare these two cases on the eve of the Kavanaugh hearing. Rather, I want to offer a note of warning about something else the two might turn out to share: that the questions raised about Judge Kavanaugh in his first hearing will be submerged by the onrushing tide of scandal, as they were for Justice Thomas.
I’ve observed that many people who followed the Thomas nomination closely, even including those who retain strong feelings about the dramatic second hearing, have forgotten what happened in the first round — the real hearing, as I have persisted in calling it for the past 27 years. I don’t mean to dismiss or diminish the significance of Ms. Hill’s allegations or of the outrageous way the men of the Judiciary Committee treated her. But I do think it’s unfortunate that the cynicism and racial politics that infused the nomination of the underqualified 43-year-old Judge Thomas to a lifetime position in the seat once held by Thurgood Marshall has been erased from public memory.
It matters that the man President Bush called “the best man for the job on the merits” was unwilling or unable under the senators’ questioning to deviate an inch from his prepared talking points; that although he was a sitting federal appeals court judge (albeit for only 18 months) his knowledge of recent Supreme Court decisions was shaky at best; or that he made the implausible claim that he had never expressed a view, even in conversation, about Roe v. Wade, a precedent that he then voted, in dissent, to repudiate when the opportunity arose during his first year on the Supreme Court bench.
In one way, Brett Kavanaugh as a Supreme Court nominee is Clarence Thomas’s opposite. His conventional qualifications are not in doubt. (The American Bar Association committee that deemed him “well qualified,” the organization’s highest rating, had adjudged Clarence Thomas to be only “qualified,” with a minority of the members deeming him “unqualified.”) After a Supreme Court clerkship and 12 years on the federal appellate bench, he has an easy familiarity with the intricacies of the Supreme Court’s docket. His avoidance of direct questions about his substantive views was graceful to the point of tedium, and not a surprise to anyone.
So what should the public remember from the “real” Brett Kavanaugh hearing? Again, to be clear, I don’t mean to minimize the importance of the hearing scheduled for Thursday. My concern is that the vulnerabilities that have come to light in recent days — not only Dr. Blasey’s precise allegation of sexual assault but also tales of the nominee’s heavy drinking in high school and beyond, his disturbingly suggestive yearbook entry, and his buddy who could say a lot but who chooses not to talk — collectively have already started to drown out the vulnerabilities that should have made the nomination something other than the partisan glide path to confirmation that it was on when the first-round hearing ended.
What were those earlier vulnerabilities? His work for the George W. Bush White House, many details of which have never been fully disclosed. His willingness last year, as a judge, to delay an undocumented teenager’s access to an abortion to which she was legally entitled, along with the not inconsiderable prospect that he would provide the long-awaited fifth vote to overturn Roe v. Wade. More fundamentally, there is the weighty argument that a president who may not have been legitimately elected, and who had already filled a Supreme Court seat that everyone knows was President Barack Obama’s to fill, had not earned the right to project onto the court a minority constitutional vision and lock it in place, probably for decades.
No matter what happens on Thursday and in the days to come, I hope people will remember what the Kavanaugh nomination looked like at the close of the initial hearing.
At this moment, the line fits Brett Kavanaugh, too. He and Clarence Thomas have that in common.
