Ms. Daniels, a pornographic actress and director whose legal name is Stephanie Clifford, later alleged that the statement she was told to sign was false. She maintains that she did have an affair with Mr. Trump, and was threatened into silence.
But it was true in one respect. People will soon be reading about it in her book.
“Full Disclosure,” which St. Martin’s Press will publish on Oct. 2, contains few new bombshells, but it is likely to rattle the White House nonetheless. In the memoir, Ms. Clifford gives a vivid, detailed account of her encounter with Mr. Trump in 2006 and its aftermath. Her book comes out just weeks before the November midterm elections, potentially bringing her story back into the headlines as Democrats and Republicans fight over control of Congress.
The news media has covered Ms. Clifford’s story heavily for the better part of 2018, since the news that Mr. Cohen paid her hush money first broke toward the start of the year. What began as a tale about money paid to silence a porn star alleging an affair with a major presidential candidate went on to become a full-fledged campaign finance scandal. Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty last month to illegally paying Ms. Clifford — far in excess of the legal donation limits — to protect Mr. Trump’s election prospects, saying he was acting at Mr. Trump’s direction.
The book does not add many new details to the basic facts of the legal case, though Ms. Clifford does raise questions about efforts to shut down the publication of her story after she made arrangements to sell it to In Touch magazine in 2011. Mr. Trump was also contemplating a presidential run that year.
Ms. Clifford writes that in making an offer to have her on his reality-competition show “The Apprentice” during his courtship of her, Mr. Trump said he would help her cheat to avoid losing the “challenges” the show staged to pare down the contestants. As she has noted previously, he did not make good on his promise to get her onto the show.
She reports that during one visit with Mr. Trump — while watching a “Shark Week” documentary — Mr. Trump fielded a call from Hillary Clinton, whose 2008 bid for the presidency Mr. Trump supported. Ms. Clifford also shared new details about Mr. Trump’s genitalia, which caused a predictable stir on Twitter on Tuesday.
“Full Disclosure” is the latest damaging tell-all book in a succession of them, coming just after Omarosa Manigault Newman’s “Unhinged: An Insider’s Account of the Trump White House” and Bob Woodward’s “Fear: Trump in the White House,” which sold more than 1.1 million copies in its first week.
Mr. Trump’s presidency has proved to be an unexpected boon for the publishing industry, which has unleashed a barrage of juicy insider accounts. In a typical presidency, pundits and journalists have to wait years for administration insiders to spill the details. Out of either deference or self-preservation, government officials often hold off until a new administration is in place to offer their insider account. But the chaos and turmoil within the Trump administration has upended the usual Washington publishing cycle, as disgruntled ex-staff members and officials who have been pushed out or resigned churn out books at a breakneck pace, at least by the normally glacial standards of publishing.
Many of these accounts have shot to the top of the best-seller lists, often after the White House disputes the revelations or threatens legal action, prompting a fresh round of news coverage.
“The ideal thing is to have a book that Trump attacks, because that all but guarantees you best-seller status,” said Matt Latimer, a literary agent and co-partner at Javelin, which represents James Comey.
In the heated competition for the next political blockbuster, Macmillan, which owns St. Martin’s, Henry Holt and Flatiron Books, among other imprints, has often prevailed. The company has published Michael Wolff’s “Fire and Fury,” which has nearly three million copies in circulation, and the former F.B.I. director James Comey’s “A Higher Loyalty,” which has sold more than a million copies. On Tuesday, St. Martin’s announced that it had acquired a book by the former F.B.I. deputy director Andrew McCabe, who has been a regular target of Mr. Trump’s ire on Twitter. Mr. McCabe’s book, “The Threat: How the F.B.I. Protects America in the Age of Terror and Trump,” is due out this December, and covers his role in leading politically sensitive investigations into Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server and Russia’s efforts to sway the 2016 presidential election.
Publishers have had to become more nimble to stay relevant at a chaotic and hyperpartisan moment.
“The challenge that it poses is that the news cycle changes every day; it’s like a Ping-Pong match trying to figure out where the country’s attention is going to be,” said Jennifer Enderlin, executive vice president and publisher of St. Martin’s.
Ms. Clifford’s fall book publicity tour and possible presence on best-seller lists could serve as reminders to voters of the allegations of infidelity surrounding Mr. Trump — as well as the campaign improprieties related to them that resulted in the felonious campaign finance violations to which Mr. Cohen pleaded guilty.
Then again, Ms. Clifford’s allegations against Mr. Trump are clearly already baked into voter impressions of him at this stage, and some political strategists did not expect the book to significantly alter perceptions of him in ways that would change the dynamic of the fall campaign.
