Yet again, the nonconformist rebels of yesteryear become the standard-setters of today. The Museum of Modern Art exhibition “Judson Dance Theater: The Work Is Never Done” shows why the work of the New York downtown dance experimentalists of the 1960s was once radical. Many people would still be challenged by it today.
The show is accompanied by performances of work by these dance-makers, many of whom are still alive. What’s become ever more evident is that some of those 1960s dances, apart from being challenging, are, memorably, witty and sensuous.
They also show points in common with dances made in that era by far more establishment figures. This week the exhibition is featuring dances made by Yvonne Rainer from 1961 to ’69. (Other choreographers are represented in weeks to come.) Watching the performances on Monday, I was happily amazed by how much of the material brought a smile to my face. And I found myself making connections between it and choreography by figures as diverse as Frederick Ashton, Pina Bausch, Merce Cunningham, Jerome Robbins and Twyla Tharp.
Ms. Rainer has long been famous for her 1965 “No” manifesto. (“No to spectacle. No to virtuosity. No to transformations and magic and make-believe….”) But it’s easy to respond to Monday’s program, “Early Dances, 1961-1969,” with “Yes, yes, yes.” It lasted about 85 minutes; the dancers include some of New York’s finest, with Ms. Rainer herself, now 83, making two deadpan appearances.
It’s far easier to see today that “Trio A” — her best-known creation, often called the seminal work of postmodern dance — exemplifies virtues shared with several other dance greats: complex physical coordination, contrasts of dynamics and fascinating tests of phrasing. We saw this classic in several iterations here: as a solo (“Retrograde”), a duet (“Facing”) and a quartet (“In the Midnight Hour”), each showing significant compositional alterations.
“Trio A” (1966) contains a dramatic moment in which a dancer leans forward from the waist with arms spread, so that head, torso, arms and hands make a plane parallel to, and addressing, the floor: That’s an image that Robbins used memorably in “Dances at a Gathering” (1969). And there’s a sequence in which the arms circle vertically, in opposition, while the dancer slowly wheels one leg around from back to front while advancing: That kind of tricky simultaneity of upper and lower body movement is something that abounds in Ashton’s ballets.
As “Trio A” links a series of apparently unrelated physical tasks into one chain, it seems to deny what’s usually recognized as phrasing, with everything delivered in the same cool matter-of-fact flatness. Really, though, this linking, with no stops or starts, becomes one of the ultimate feats of phrasing. The experiment of combining unrelated movements in sequence is something that Cunningham had already developed (with greater technical rigor), and that Ms. Tharp was also pursuing, both in the 1960s and in later dances. These characteristics are related to many of the epic dance-theater creations of Bausch, who was dancing in New York in the early 1960s.
One performer here is Pat Catterson, who is Ms. Rainer’s assistant for this production and has been a longtime custodian of her early work. She’s lucid without any attempt at polish: awkwardness — rawness — plays its part. Another dancer, Emily Coates, tackles some of the technically hardest assignments with brilliantly commanding precision. The Rainer style allows for both kinds of performance; it also easily includes the marvelous playfulness and fantasy expressed by Keith Sabado and the uninhibited absurdity of Patricia Hoffbauer — as well as for other highly individual figures.
The dances include “Talking Solos” (from “Terrain,” 1963), which establish an ironic dichotomy between speech and movement, and which may have prompted Cunningham’s “How to Pass, Kick, Fall and Run” (1968). There are several experiments with choreographic musicality. “Three Satie Spoons” (1961) is a series of three solos danced to Erik Satie’s “Three Gymnopédies,” featuring remarkably sudden jumps, pounces and contrasts (legato and staccato, motion and stillness), all interestingly set to the famous piano items. Her “Three Seascapes” (1962) begins with dance set against the romantically intense third movement of Rachmaninov’s Second Piano Concerto, then carries on against the abrasive “Poem for Tables, Chairs, Benches” by the still avant-garde composer La Monte Young.
Tina Turner’s “River Deep, Mountain High” is another soundtrack, rhythmically used in Ms. Rainer’s “Chair-Pillow.” This, like several other Rainer creations, can be seen now as part of the Theater of the Absurd, a genre that in spoken theater began in the 1950s with Beckett, Ionesco and Pinter. Like many of their plays, the complex feats of Ms. Rainer’s dances now reveal a deep and often happy humanity. Look — they seem to say — how fabulously these people look at the same time both peculiar and natural, self-contradictory and touching.