The senator’s daughter Meghan McCain and former presidents Barack Obama and George W. Bush were among those who made eulogies to John McCain at a memorial service on Saturday.
He was a warrior, he was a prisoner, he was a hero, he was a congressman, he was a senator, he was a nominee for president of the United States. We gather here to mourn the passing of American greatness. The real thing, not cheap rhetoric from men who will never come near the sacrifice he gave so willingly. Nor the opportunistic appropriation of those who live lives of comfort and privilege, while he suffered and served. The America of John McCain has no need to be made great again, because America was always great. He was honorable, always recognizing that his opponents were still patriots and human beings. He loved freedom with the passion of a man who knew its absence. He respected the dignity inherent in every life. A dignity that does not stop at borders and cannot be erased by dictators. John believed in honest argument and hearing other views. He understood that if we get in the habit of bending the truth to suit political expediency or party orthodoxy our democracy will not work. That’s why he was willing to buck his own party at times, occasionally work across the aisle on campaign finance reform and immigration reform. That’s why he championed a free and independent press as vital to our democratic debate.
Former Presidents George W. Bush and Barack Obama, the two men who thwarted Mr. McCain’s ambitions to become commander in chief, stood one after the other before the nation’s elite at Washington National Cathedral on Saturday to honor the man they beat, extolling him as a one-of-a-kind figure the likes of which will not be seen again anytime soon.
Mr. Bush praised Mr. McCain for his “courage and decency,” an exemplar of the storied American values of standing up to bullying and oppression. “If we are ever tempted to forget who we are, to grow weary of our cause, John’s voice will always come as a whisper over our shoulder — we are better than this, America is better than this,” Mr. Bush said.
If their better-than-this eulogies were widely seen as an implicit reproach of Mr. Trump, Meghan McCain left no mystery who she had in mind with a powerful, emotional, sobbing remembrance of her father that also sounded like a defiant cri de coeur against the tycoon-turned-president who once belittled the senator’s wartime service.
Mocking Mr. Trump’s favorite slogan, she later declared: “The America of John McCain has no need to be made great again because America was always great.” The audience then burst out in applause, something that rarely happens during the traditionally solemn funerals held at the cathedral.
While Mr. Trump was absent, political figures from both parties made their way to the house of worship on a dreary, overcast and humid morning. They came to bid farewell to John Sidney McCain III, son and grandson of admirals, naval aviator, tortured prisoner, congressman, six-term senator, two-time presidential candidate, patriot, maverick, reformer, warrior, curmudgeon, father, husband and finally, in death, American icon.
They also came to mourn an ideal that he represented and a town that he once dominated with verve and humor and memorable flashes of temper. Like Mr. McCain, many of the Republicans who attended have found themselves deeply discouraged by their own party’s president. But unlike Mr. McCain, most of them do not say so out loud, for fear of rage by Twitter or retribution by the base. It was almost as if it were a meeting of Washington’s political underground, if the underground met in a grand cathedral with 10,650 organ pipes.
For his part, Mr. Trump spent the morning railing again on Twitter about his opponents, the news media and the investigation into his campaign’s interactions with Russia during the 2016 election.
Standing in for Mr. Trump at the cathedral were his daughter Ivanka Trump and son-in-law, Jared Kushner, as well as his chief of staff, John F. Kelly, and national security adviser, John R. Bolton, seated not far away from former President Bill Clinton and former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Rudolph W. Giuliani, the president’s lawyer and a longtime political ally of Mr. McCain’s, also attended.
Mr. McCain, who died last weekend at 81, directed his own farewell with the same contrarian spirit that flavored his political career, and it came off just as he would have wanted. The two-and-a-half-hour ceremony blended the majesty of the officially designated national house of prayer, the discipline of his cherished Naval Academy and the unabashed, unapologetic patriotism of a Fourth of July fireworks display.
As he battled brain cancer, Mr. McCain told his advisers months ago that he wanted Mr. Bush and Mr. Obama to speak at his funeral, then called each of them to make the request. The point was to emphasize the common values that they shared despite their differences.
Mr. Obama admitted to a “certain surprise” when Mr. McCain called to ask him to speak at his service, but said he came to realize it demonstrated the senator’s relish for unpredictability, disdain for self-pity, largeness of spirit and mischievous streak.
The former president noted that despite their debates, he and Mr. McCain shared a commitment to overhauling immigration and campaign finance laws, and he praised the senator for his fidelity to American principles like the rule of law and a free press.
Mr. Bush defeated Mr. McCain for the Republican presidential nomination in 2000 after an acrid campaign, and the two clashed regularly over the next eight years, perhaps most notably over the issue of torture. Mr. McCain forced Mr. Bush to accept legislation intended to ban the use of waterboarding and other harsh interrogation methods.
But when the war in Iraq went badly and Mr. Bush was abandoned by virtually everyone, Mr. McCain stuck with him and supported a surge of troops and strategy shift that helped turn the war around.
Mr. McCain’s flag-draped coffin was taken by motorcade on Saturday morning from Capitol Hill to the cathedral, stopping along the way at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, where Cindy McCain laid a wreath in honor of her husband, whose five and a half years of captivity during that war vaulted him to national prominence.
