With the midterms fast approaching, Hillary Clinton has written a scathing critique of President Trump that accused him of disregarding the law and weakening the social fabric of the country, imploring voters to “do everything we can to fight back” and “mobilize massive turnout” in November.
When Mr. Trump prevailed over Mrs. Clinton in the 2016 election, she had told her supporters that they owed him “an open mind and the chance to lead,” she recalled in the essay, which was posted by The Atlantic on Sunday.
“And right now, our democracy is in crisis,” she added, saying she does not use the word “crisis” lightly.
Comparing Mr. Trump to a tyrant, Mrs. Clinton said he considered himself above the law. She cited the investigation led by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, to examine links between the Trump campaign and Russian officials, pointing to an article in The New York Times that said Mr. Trump told White House officials that he needed Attorney General Jeff Sessions to protect him, and had asked the White House’s top lawyer to stop Mr. Sessions from recusing himself in the Justice Department’s investigation.
Mrs. Clinton also expressed concern over the legitimacy of the country’s elections, saying it was “in doubt.” She pointed to “Russia’s ongoing interference and Trump’s complete unwillingness to stop it or protect us,” as well as voter suppression and gerrymandering efforts.
Representatives from the White House did not immediately respond on Monday to a request for comment.
In addition to her blistering critiques, Mrs. Clinton’s essay also listed ways to help “save our democracy,” such as voting during the midterms, engaging in “serious housecleaning” in Washington and pursuing election reform, which included a call to abolish the Electoral College.
Democrats have mobilized in advance of the November midterm elections, drawing on help from former President Barack Obama, who had largely stayed out of the fray after leaving office.
In recent weeks, however, Mr. Obama has also spoken out against Mr. Trump, describing the president and his administration as a “threat to our democracy” during a speech at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign on Sept. 7.
During the speech, Mr. Obama condemned Mr. Trump’s policies on climate change, taxes, health care and regulations, and also blamed him for polarizing the nation.
Mr. Obama said he decided to speak out because “the stakes really are higher” than before.
Mr. Trump, who had not commented on Mrs. Clinton’s essay as of Monday morning, had seemed to take Mr. Obama’s words in stride.
He also speculated that Mr. Obama’s criticism might further motivate his base. “Now if that doesn’t get you out to vote for the midterms, nothing will,” he said.