Ms. Washington, the first African-American female staff photographer for The New York Times, knew how to keep her cool even in tense situations.
Ruby Washington was an intensely private person. Her daughter, Courtney, said she had no idea her mother was the first African-American woman to become a staff photographer at The New York Times. Her editors said that while she won awards, she didn’t go to galas to accept them. And when she fell ill with breast cancer in 2010, many of her colleagues had no clue, since she kept on working.
This week, many of them were stunned when they learned that Ms. Washington, 66, died after her cancer returned earlier this year. Her reticence may have been more than just a quirk, but a survival strategy for someone who was promoted from lab technician to staff photographer, much to the intense resentment of some of the men who felt they had been passed over.
Ms. Washington grew up on a farm in Patterson, Ga., where her father grew tobacco, cotton and vegetables. A middle child of 12 siblings, she started taking pictures in childhood, her sister Freddie Washington said.
She said her sister lived for a while with another sibling in South Florida, where she attended community college. She then moved in with Freddie in Brooklyn, going to college and starting at The Times in the mid-1970s, working in the back copy department. Soon enough, she moved to the lab and, later, staff.
Nancy Weinstock, who was a picture editor on Metro, was a mentor of sorts to Ms. Washington, whom she described as a “well-rounded” news photographer. More important, she said, her cool demeanor was an asset when working with reporters in delicate or tense situations.
Her best-known image — an over the shoulder shot of then-Secretary of State Colin Powell reading a note of congratulations for making the case for the Iraq invasion at the United Nations — came from such patience. In a 2014 Lens post on the occasion of her retirement, she recalled her excitement when she saw Mr. Powell unfold the note that was, presumably, from the British foreign secretary, Jack Straw.
Silence can say many things. Her colleague Ángel Franco recalled her reassuring smile when he would drop off film in the 1980s. In turn, he took to calling her Ruby, My Dear, after the Thelonious Monk composition, which he hummed for her one day. Monk was a fitting choice, since he knew that what was not said was just as important as what was.
