Opinion|Who Are You Calling a ‘Harringtonite’?
Who Are You Calling a ‘Harringtonite’?
What Michael Harrington, once America’s most famous socialist, would think about his political descendants.
Sometime in the early spring of 2016, as Bernie Sanders began racking up primary victories in his bid for the Democratic presidential nomination, I found myself wondering what the impact would be on a group that I belong to, Democratic Socialists of America. Since its founding in 1982, the organization had been stuck at about 6,000 members, and by 2016, many were, like me, middle-aged or older, mostly white and male.
I remember saying to my old friend Joe, who like me was a D.S.A. charter member, that if it couldn’t increase its membership under those circumstances, it ought to take down the shingle and close up shop. And in fact, two years later, the membership is above 50,000, an eightfold increase. Many if not most of those new members come from the 18-to-34-year-old demographic — 45 percent of which, according to a recent University of Chicago survey, hold a favorable opinion of socialism.
Critics in the political center and right have struggled to respond to this swerve to the left, but one common response has been: This is not your father’s (or grandfather’s) D.S.A. — which is to say it is not well mannered, slightly tweedy, even academic. It is not, in other words, Michael Harrington.
There’s no question that Harrington was a decent man. But setting aside the dubiousness of The Wall Street Journal channeling the thoughts of a long-deceased democratic socialist, Harrington was anything but the meek, elbow-patched caricature that people on the right — and even in some of the hard-left factions within the D.S.A. itself — imagine. In fact, a better understanding of Harrington’s career and ideas tells us a lot about the future of today’s re-energized democratic socialists.
Born in St. Louis in 1928, Harrington moved to New York in 1949, where soon after he joined the socialist movement. By the 1960s, his political views were grounded in two core principles: First, that in the label “democratic socialist,” the two words merited equal emphasis, and that it was, indeed, impossible to have genuine socialism without democracy. And second, that democratic socialists should function as the “left-wing of the possible” in American politics, committed to coalition-building around common goals with progressives outside their own ranks, including the labor, civil rights, environmental and feminist movements, as well as the liberal wing of the Democratic Party.
Few of today’s new D.S.A. members, three decades after Harrington’s death, are “hardened faction fighters.” They have been described as “nondenominational socialists,” in search of a political community of like-minded activists, more concerned with practical results than ancient political feuds, all of which is to their credit.
But, like their predecessors in previous radical generations, including the young Michael Harrington, some will be drawn, at least for a time, to whatever policy and doctrine seems to promise the greatest personal sense of moral purity. There are newly organized caucuses within D.S.A. that seek to push the organization further leftward, in directions antithetical to the Harrington tradition. Indeed, in some quarters of D.S.A., “Harringtonite” has become a term of abuse, used to demean people who emphasize practicality and compromise.
Amid all the promising signs of growth, youth, energy and imagination, the old familiar tensions between a politics of the possible and a politics of pretend combat on the plains of destiny have re-emerged.
These tensions came to the fore in a recent debate within the New York City chapters of D.S.A. over whether or not to endorse Cynthia Nixon’s campaign for the Democratic gubernatorial nomination in New York.
In a further exercise in left sectarianism, Ms. Ocasio-Cortez has herself come under attack from some D.S.A. members for advocating what they regard as too moderate a line on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict (i.e., a two-state solution) and for issuing a statement of condolence on the death of Senator John McCain. Bernie Sanders also came under fire for saying some kind words about his late colleague.
Of course, the reason D.S.A. now has close to 50,000 members, instead of 6,000, is precisely because Mr. Sanders (though not a member of the D.S.A.) ran as an independent socialist in the Democratic primaries and made a surprisingly good showing doing so, and because Ms. Ocasio-Cortez won her race for a Democratic congressional nomination in the Bronx. The two of them ­did immeasurably more to popularize democratic socialism by acting as the left wing of the possible than any number of purist third-party campaigns, or electoral abstinence, could ever have accomplished.
In the end, there is a happy ending to this tangled story. D.S.A. members in New York City voted by a three-to-one majority to do the sensible, nonsectarian — and if I may say so, Harringtonite — thing by endorsing Ms. Nixon’s primary challenge. Michael Harrington, raised a staunch Catholic, departed the church as a young man. But if he did somehow make the ascent to heaven’s left coast, I’m guessing that he’s watching recent developments in D.S.A. with his characteristic cautious optimism.
