The midterm elections are coming up. The Times’s politics team answered our questions about them.
Welcome to The Edit newsletter. Each week you’ll hear from college students and recent graduates about issues going on in their lives. You also may hear from me, Lindsey Underwood, editor of the newsletter. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
We know voting is important, but taking the time to research all of the candidates and their values can be time consuming, and honestly, a little confusing. We wanted to find out what people our age should know in order to vote responsibly.
This week, we were joined by another contributor to The Edit, Ebony Miranda, to talk to a few members of The New York Times politics team about the midterm elections and what we should know about them.
Joe Jurado: Why are midterms important? If we’re starting broad, why should we care?
Alex Burns: I mean, it’s your one chance to weigh in on the Trump administration and Washington. It’s the biggest year for governors races, right? Those races affect people’s lives directly. If you live in Michigan or Florida, the stakes of state elections may be higher for your actual life than the outcome of a federal election. As a reporter, I think the midterms are really useful in challenging us and showing us the state of the country. In a regular election people are more polarized and have made up their minds a little bit. In the midterm, people behave in an unpredictable way and reveal things about themselves in a way you don’t get in a choice between a Democrat or Republican presidential candidate.
Astead Herndon: After so much activism in the last couple years, this is an opportunity for college kids to get their voices involved in the political process. From March for our Lives to the Women’s March and a lot of the activism in between, so many young people have really forcefully asserted themselves. I think specifically for young people this is the time to turn a lot of that talk into real political action.
Ebony Miranda: That’s something I’ve been thinking a lot about, too. A lot of people in my age group are very politically active, but I feel like a lot of younger people don’t really feel like their voices are being heard. What do you think is the best way encourage my peers to go vote? What’s a good way to open up that conversation?
Sydney Ember: There’s the old saying, “if you don’t vote the other person’s vote counts twice.” If you want your voice to be heard, the number one way to make it heard is to vote and get other people to vote too. If you want to make an impact you have to vote.
Alex: Making it really personal for people is important. I think that one of the big mistakes both political parties make is asking people to vote on abstract issues. It’s not an accident that we’ll often see higher turnout if there’s a referendum on minimum wage or decriminalizing marijuana, because people understand specific issues. A lot of candidates tend to campaign on very lofty ideas, which are just not that relatable for a lot of people.
Hallie Reed: It’s hard to communicate to students about the issues they should feel a personal connection to. If things are too abstract they are not sure why they should be involved in anything. So I guess going off that, in trying to get students and young people now to see how this election would really affect them, what do you think is the most significant, immediate ramification of either the Democrats taking the house or the Republicans keeping it?
Alex: If you’re somebody who is very focused on one thing, whether that’s a hard-line immigration policy, repealing the Affordable Care Act or cutting taxes, none of that is going to happen if you have Democrats in control of one chamber of Congress. If you’re a progressive person, the federal election is more about thwarting the president and state elections are more about the opportunity to, for instance, pass less restrictive laws, or health care or education funding on a state level.
Joe: Is it enough for Democrats to run on the, “We’re not Trump” agenda? I feel like that’s sort of what I’ve been seeing: “We’re not him.” But in terms of tangible policies, there’s nothing really there.
Sydney: I think in some places that could work, where Democrats are basically saying, “we’re Democrats. If you don’t like Trump and if you don’t like what the administration is doing then just vote for us.” But in a lot of places, especially in House elections, there are more Democrats that have actual policy issues that they want to talk about, they talk about health care, they talk about jobs.
Astead: Yeah, I think that Democrats have been fairly aware of that criticism, which is why we’ve seen growth even from most resistance-based candidates talking about what are the best progressive policies, like health care for all. Now, that being said, they are certainly benefiting from anti-Trump energy among voters and they really want to court that energy.
Joe: I am a Democrat and I live in Arizona, which is a very red state, and there are also people who are very Republican who live in a very blue states. What would you say would motivate them to go vote, knowing that they’re kind of outnumbered?
Astead: Arizona is a battleground state. It’s not even that really deeply red. There’s a really important Senate race happening there that could go either way. If you live in Arizona and you’re a Democrat, your voice and your vote matter more than it has in a long time come November. There’s also a governor’s race and local races, which are deeply important. There’s always an election that matters. I mean whether you are a Republican in Chicago or you are a Democrat in North Dakota, there is something that is happening on some level of government that you and your vote can affect. I also think voting is the purest form is about expressing ideals. Even if you don’t win, even if your candidate doesn’t win, there is the pure theory that should vote to express what you believe in. Even if a candidate loses, it’s a way to send a message.
Sydney: I would also add that we’re seeing this year that districts or regions that are reliably one party or another, particularly reliably Republican, don’t always end up going that way. I mean, look at Alabama, they elected Doug Jones. They had all thought there was no way Democrats would be elected, but you never know, especially today.
Alex: That was one of the most amazing things I have seen as a reporter. I was at the Doug Jones party covering the election that night. Being in Alabama beforehand there was a sense among Democrats that they had a real shot in this race. I think many people felt that, unless you’re over 60 and a Democrat in Alabama you don’t remember a time where your party won elections, right? At the Doug Jones party on election night, the place just went ballistic cause they never saw anything like it. When I was walking to the parking garage this older couple, like maybe 60s early 70s and they asked me where I was from and I said, “New York, I write for The New York Times.” I said I’d never seen anything like this and they started laughing and said neither have we. So to Sydney’s point, weird stuff happens. This is part of why midterm elections are very interesting and compelling because they’re not as polarized as the presidential race and the turnout matters a lot.
Sydney: And I’ll just add that there are a lot places that used to be reliably Republican especially that people would consider red areas that are now for one reason or another becoming more and more blue, like Orange County, Calif.
Astead: The whole state of Virginia.
Sydney: Right, the whole state of Virginia or even Nevada. Sometimes there are places that you think of as very reliably one way or the other, but they’re not anymore.
Ebony: A lot of college students want to be politically involved, but they’ve just moved to a different state or a different city. They may not understand the political history of the area they’re now living in but want to participate. What advice and resources can you give to young voters who are new to a city and aren’t familiar with the people running in their area?
Alex: One resource for people who are new to an area look for advocacy groups that focus on issues that you care about. They’ll often tell you what a candidate’s record is on, say taxes, guns, abortion rights or the environment.
Astead: I don’t think there are any easy shortcuts to this. You have to do the hard work of figuring out the context of the place you live in. You have to find the IDs that are necessary to try to vote. Sometimes that’s extremely difficult for college students. But I think doing that work is part of what citizenship is.
What Teenagers Think About the Allegations Against Brett Kavanaugh High school girls said they recognized the way Mr. Kavanaugh’s accuser, Christine Blasey Ford, was being criticized for speaking out.
The Big Secret of Celebrity Wealth (Is That No One Knows Anything) Chris Hemsworth, Chris Pine and Chris Pratt are cumulatively worth $150 million, according to your Google results. Are they really?
Tell Us Your Love Story. Just Keep It Really Short. We’re looking for all the emotion that’s fit to print — in 100 words or fewer.
A Plot to Subvert an Election: Unraveling the Russia Story So Far To many Americans, the intervention seemed to be a surprise attack. For Vladimir V. Putin, it was long-overdue payback.
I Hate Proposal Videos. Here’s Why I’m Right. Those romantic, heartwarming surprise proposal videos are actually the worst.
How Robyn, Pop’s Glittery Rebel, Danced Her Way Back From Darkness After enduring an emotional crash, a breakup and the death of a mentor, the Swedish star has her first album in eight years and the most transcendent song of her career.
In 2011, my husband and I left Red Hook, Brooklyn for his tiny, rural hometown of Fort Bragg, Calif. Fort Bragg’s population hovers around 7,000. Almost immediately, I hated it. I missed our community garden, walking everywhere, the museums, the food, the hustle and the bustle of New York, the diversity, the feeling that anything and everything was just around the corner. We lasted 11 months in Fort Bragg.
The day before our big move, we visited Chicago's Field Museum, fine dined downtown and ended our day attending a Grant Park Symphony Orchestra concert. Two days later we arrived at Esterbrook, Wyo. With our arrival, the town grew from nine to 11 inhabitants. It was 19 miles by gravel road from a town of less than 4,000. Fine dining consisted of Friday night potlucks where neighbors competed for the most exotic dish. Roasted rattler anyone? How about porcupine stew? Our neighbors were just as interesting as our meals. One day, two of them got into a dispute over a barking dog. They argued, tempers flared and soon the dog was shot dead. Twenty minutes later the dispute was settled when the culprit was shot in the knee by the dog owner. We saw both of them a month later at our Friday potluck. One was limping badly. They had decided things had gotten a bit out of hand, but there were no hard feelings.
I have a tendency to throw myself at a lot of things, and then slowly quit and back out of commitments as I find my overwhelming schedule taking a toll on my physical and mental health. But with this comes an immense amount of guilt, especially as I see my peers taking on more and more and toughing out the sleepless nights and lunch-less days. Last year, I tried to do it all in order to avoid this guilt and to keep up with my friends. It ended very badly. By the end of the spring semester, all this stress had exacerbated a chronic health issue I have, and my health and spirits were at an all-time low. I ended up having to take a step back and spend my summer at home focused on my wellness.
Now, I can feel myself slipping back in to the same pattern of overcommitting myself. As I see it, my options are either backing out of said commitments and spending my then less-busy days feeling guilty, or sticking with everything I have committed to and trying to balance it all without letting it affect my health. I don’t like either of these options! What do I do?!
I love this question because it’s something that all of us struggle with, but there’s an incredibly simple, beautiful mantra I stumbled across years ago to deal with it: If it’s not a hell yeah, it’s a no.
The idea is this: We’re constantly bombarded with ideas, projects, opportunities and more that we’d love to do — if only we had the time. But we don’t, and time is a resource you’ll find disappears exponentially quicker as you age. So you need to focus on your energy on things that truly matter to you.
First, figure out what’s core to your identity and the things you’re truly passionate about, then dive into them headfirst. This means thinking long-term about what where you want to be five, 10 or 15 years from, then working backward to figure out how to get there. If a given opportunity or project aligns with those goals, go for it. If not, be thankful for the chance and politely decline. Here’s some advice on saying “no” effectively.
Once you have a handle on your long-term goals and dreams — no easy feat! — the next step is to prioritize everything in your life, and start paring down the list to only the things that are worth doing. A concrete way to visualize this is to put everything on your plate into what’s commonly called an Eisenhower Box. This helps you figure out what matters, what matters now, what you can put off for later and what you should just drop.
Saying no is never easy; it breaks an implied social contract. But having to back out of commitments — or worse, letting people down because you didn’t have the time — is even worse. So save future you the hassle and start saying no assertively, aggressively and with your eye on where you want to be.
Navigating college and the years afterward can be tough, but we’re here to help! Maybe you’re wondering how to choose a major, or the best time to study abroad. Perhaps you’re out of school and figuring out how to budget. Send us an email at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with the subject line, “Figure It Out.” We’ll do our best to answer a new question each week.
Lindsey Underwood is an editor on the Smarter Living team. Joe Jurado and Hallie Reed are contributors to The Edit.