In her first extended comments on the fraught and tangled history between the director Woody Allen and the Farrow family, Soon-Yi Previn described her mother, Mia Farrow, as a demeaning and sometimes violent figure who exploded upon learning of her relationship with Mr. Allen — a man whom Ms. Farrow had worked with and dated for years.
The remarks, made in a lengthy New York magazine article published online on Sunday, represent the latest escalation in a decades-long dispute about allegations that Mr. Allen molested his adopted daughter Dylan Farrow.
From the beginning, Ms. Previn and her mother were “like oil and water,” she said.
In the article, Ms. Previn said her mother would try to teach her the alphabet with wooden blocks — but would throw them at her if she made a mistake. She also said that Mia Farrow would tip her upside down, “holding me by my feet, to get the blood to drain to my head” because she thought it would make her smarter.  On one occasion, she told the magazine, Mia Farrow threw a porcelain rabbit at her.
“It’s hard for someone to imagine, but I really can’t come up with a pleasant memory,” she said of her years with her mother.
In the article, a representative for the family rebutted all of Ms. Previn’s memories of physical abuse or neglect.
In a separate statement, Dylan Farrow reasserted that she had been molested by Mr. Allen when she was 7 years old, and said New York magazine should be ashamed of what she called a “one-sided piece.” The article was written by Daphne Merkin, who wrote that she has been friends with Mr. Allen for over four decades.
After outlining some of the abuse Ms. Previn says she suffered as a child, the article explains how she became romantically entangled with Mr. Allen. After she broke her ankle playing soccer, Mr. Allen offered to take her to school, she said. She began to soften toward him, and eventually the pair began going to New York Knicks games together.
Dylan Farrow has said that Mr. Allen sexually abused her by touching her genitalia on Aug. 4, 1992. Later that month, Mr. Allen sued Mia Farrow in New York State Court for the custody of Dylan, Ronan and Moses Farrow, and shortly thereafter released a statement confirming his relationship with Ms. Previn.
Mr. Allen and Ms. Previn married on Dec. 23, 1997.
“No,” Ms. Previn told her, without elaboration.