Like Barack Obama, Deidre DeJear, an African-American small-business owner and candidate for Iowa secretary of state, stresses opportunity, voting rights and unity.
Mr. Leonard is the news director for the radio stations KNIA and KRLS.
KNOXVILLE, Iowa — We keep hearing about Democratic women of color winning races in the Bronx, Georgia, Boston and other places with a diverse population. But here in mostly white Iowa, we’ve got our own story to tell. Part of that story is it’s not just diverse urban areas where a person of color can run for statewide office.
Here in Iowa, 32-year-old Deidre DeJear, an African-American small-business owner, is the Democratic nominee for secretary of state. If Ms. DeJear beats the Republican incumbent, Paul Pate, in November, she’ll become the first African-American to win statewide office in Iowa. About 91 percent of Iowans are white; only about 4 percent are African-American.
Iowa is bipolar with respect to politics and race. Barack Obama won our first-in-the-nation Democratic caucuses in 2008 to help propel him to his two-term presidency. In 2016, Donald Trump almost won, and his second-place finish in the crowded Republican caucuses proved to the rest of the nation he was a viable candidate.
Similar racial dynamics play out in races for lower offices. The rural Fourth District’s congressman is Steve King, an anti-immigration, anti-multiculturalism Republican congressman who questions the cultural contributions of nonwhites, endorses white nationalism, compared immigrants to dogs and until last year had a Confederate flag on his desk. He retweets white supremacists.
But then here is Ms. DeJear, who nearly every day engages many of the rural voters who supported Mr. Trump and Mr. King. She is part of Iowa’s contribution to a wave of women running for office nationally, and one of a record number of over 600 black women running.
What does Ms. DeJear see when she talks to people about their lives and politics? “I see hurt in their faces,” she said. “People want to work the job they want, to live in the neighborhood they choose, to provide for their families, and live the quality of life they want to.” For many of the people Ms. DeJear speaks with, that’s not happening.
Iowa has a progressive record on race that may be unsurpassed by any state in the country. In 1839, the Supreme Court of the Iowa Territory, in its first decision, ruled that a slave who had reached Iowa soil was free and could not be forced to return to a slave state.
Iowa legalized interracial marriage in 1851, a century before most of the rest of America. The 22nd Iowa Volunteer Infantry Regiment helped break the back of the Confederacy as part of Gen. Ulysses Grant’s siege of Vicksburg. The Confederate flag Mr. King had on his desk is offensive not only to African-Americans, but to those of us who are proud that our ancestors fought to end the abomination of slavery and save our union.
African-American men were granted the right to vote in 1868, two years before the 15th Amendment to the Constitution. Iowa outlawed segregated schools in 1868, a century before much of the rest of America. In 1884, the Iowa Civil Rights Act prohibited discrimination in public accommodation.
That doesn’t mean that black Iowans’ rights were always respected. On July 7, 1948, a 39-year-old African-American woman named Edna Griffin entered Katz Drug Store in downtown Des Moines with her infant daughter and two friends. Griffin and her friend John Bibbs sat down at the lunch counter but were denied service by the waitress on an order of ice cream sundaes.
Protests and a boycott of the store by both black and white citizens ensued, and a lawsuit was filed. In December 1949, the Iowa Supreme Court ruled that Katz Drug Store had discriminated against Griffin and Bibbs. This boycott occurred seven years before the bus boycott in Montgomery, Ala., led by Rosa Parks.
Griffin is often called the Rosa Parks of Iowa. Another way of looking at it is that Parks should be called the Edna Griffin of Alabama.
Ms. DeJear has a personal connection to civil and voting rights. She was born in Mississippi, moved to Iowa to attend Drake University in Des Moines, and stayed.
The passage of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 may seem like a long time ago to some, but it’s yesterday to those who were directly affected and their kin.
Her opponent, Mr. Pate, has followed the lead of Republicans nationally who work to disenfranchise minority, poor and elderly voters by putting obstacles in front of them like voter ID requirements and reduced voting periods.
At the Democratic Hall of Fame Dinner in June, Ms. DeJear drew the most applause while being introduced. I asked about a dozen people why they felt so strongly about her and her messaging. People spoke of her “charisma,” “quiet confidence,” “her passion”; she “makes us feel like family,” one said.
Like Mr. Obama, Ms. DeJear hits a recurring theme: opportunity for all.
Race, by contrast, plays little or no role in her messaging, as it didn’t in Mr. Obama’s. Mr. Obama stressed unity, and Ms. DeJear is following his path. Democrats might recall it was an effective path, especially for Democrats in rural America. Nationwide, in 2016, over 200 counties that had gone for Mr. Obama in 2008 and 2012 voted for Donald Trump. For the record, if these people voted for Mr. Trump because they are racists, they became so after electing Mr. Obama to office not once, but twice.
Add into the mix those counties that voted for Mr. Obama once either in 2012 or 2016, and we have a great many rural counties that have the potential to turn blue in 2018 and 2020, if Democrats’ campaigns promote unity and opportunity, rather than division.
That’s what Deidre DeJear is doing on the campaign trail, talking about values and opportunity. Democrats might notice that this message can create opportunities in Midwestern states that the party is desperate to reclaim.
Robert Leonard is the news director for the radio stations KNIA and KRLS.
Follow The New York Times Opinion section on Facebook and Twitter (@NYTopinion).