WASHINGTON — The head of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization worked to shore up support in Washington this week, with boosters of the alliance anxious to retain the support of American conservatives amid criticism by President Trump and ahead of a possible Senate vote next year on expansion.
Jens Stoltenberg, the NATO secretary general, worked Capitol Hill this week to make a case that the alliance was important to American prosperity and security, keeping peace in Europe and bolstering American military might and intelligence reach.
Mr. Stoltenberg has one of the more difficult jobs in international diplomacy, trying to make progress on Mr. Trump’s demands for more European military spending, assuring allies that the United States remains committed to Europe’s defense and trying to keep separate issues of trade and foreign policy that Washington is intent on merging.
But he has proved to be one of the European allies most adept at handling Mr. Trump, maintaining a good relationship despite the White House’s frequent criticisms.
NATO has remained a favorite punching bag of Mr. Trump, who returns to the fact that most of Western Europe has not yet met the alliance goal of spending 2 percent of economic output on defense.
So far, the alliance has maintained broad support on Capitol Hill despite Mr. Trump’s attacks. But allied officials have been worried that conservative support could weaken. The Senate next year could face a vote on ratifying Macedonia as a member of the alliance, if the small Balkan country agrees to change its name in a referendum this month.
The White House criticism of NATO, according to surveys done by the Pew Research Center, has eroded some Republican support for the alliance, although Democratic public support has risen.
Mr. Stoltenberg, during his visit to the United States this week, has met with members of Congress, including members of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee and members of the NATO Observers Group. That group of pro-alliance lawmakers was revived last year by Kay Bailey Hutchison, the American ambassador to NATO.
In an interview, Mr. Stoltenberg said political debate over NATO should not be feared but welcomed. He recalled one of his first political fights, persuading his left-wing youth organization to reverse a stance against the alliance.
Some libertarian writers have been skeptical of expansion by NATO in the Balkans, arguing that the small countries there bring new security responsibilities for the United States, rather than bolstering American defense.
At a speech on Friday at the conservative Heritage Foundation, Mr. Stoltenberg argued that NATO expansion bolsters defense by building stability in Europe.
But he also argued that the strength of Europe’s military and spy services is also employed for the defense of the United States.
Mr. Stoltenberg said allied intelligence services were helping the United States by tracking the movements of both terrorist cells and Russian submarines.
“America’s NATO allies employ tens of thousands intelligence personnel, many of them working in close coordination with their U.S. counterparts, giving the United States better eyes and ears than you would otherwise have,” he said.
Still, Mr. Stoltenberg was quick to add his now practiced lines about how Mr. Trump’s pressure and critique of the alliance has helped bolster military spending.
Mr. Trump’s focus on European military spending has brought sustained attention to the issue, but spending began rising before the president’s pressure campaign in the wake of Russia’s 2014 annexation of Crimea and the realization in Western Europe that Moscow was once again a destabilizing force on the Continent.
Luke Coffey, an expert on European defense at the Heritage Foundation, said conservative support for NATO remained strong, despite the skepticism of Mr. Trump and Senator Rand Paul, the Kentucky Republican and libertarian.
Mr. Paul and Senator Mike Lee, Republican of Utah, both opposed Montenegro’s accession to NATO last year.
Mr. Coffey praised Mr. Stoltenberg for taking a measured stance in the face of Mr. Trump’s critique, which has allowed the NATO headquarters to maintain credibility with the White House and conservatives on Capitol Hill.
