Football season is starting on Thursday with a not-so-small problem. The players don’t know what to do with their helmets.
Alarmed by rising concussion rates and the lasting effects of repeated hits to the head, the N.F.L. adopted a new rule — 49 indistinct words — prohibiting any player from lowering his head to make contact with an opponent.
Put simply, it outlawed using the helmet as a weapon. And it applies to everyone, including the running back digging in for the extra yard and the lineman bowing to prevent it.
Violating the rule would draw a 15-yard penalty or, possibly, an ejection from the game, plus a fine or a suspension.
It was another, perhaps tortuous step by a league fighting for its future as awareness and research deepen about the long-term consequences of large men crashing into each other.
Yet the helmet rule, directed at such an elementary piece of equipment and focused on the basic idea of the game to knock down the guy with the ball, has touched a particular nerve.
It has infuriated players, baffled coaches and placed the league’s already embattled game officials under greater scrutiny and pressure.
Some players who do a lot of the hitting have insisted it will lead to more injuries, not prevent them.
Richard Sherman, the San Francisco 49ers’ Pro Bowl cornerback, called the new rule a “disaster” and mocked the notion that every tackle could be made without helmet contact.
Jets Coach Todd Bowles, noting that the new rule applied to every player on the field, wondered how it could be policed.
“I don’t know if we have enough referees to call all that,” Bowles said.
In Chicago, the Bears’ 2018 first-round draft pick, Roquan Smith, refused to sign a rookie contract for 29 days until there was language in the deal that prevented the team from withholding his salary should he be suspended for violating the new rule.
Giants defensive tackle Damon Harrison feared the rule exposed players to debilitating, career-threatening knee injuries — and a rules quandary, too.
And John Harbaugh, coach of the Baltimore Ravens, said he had prepared his players for botched calls and inconsistencies.
Football has always been governed by a plethora of exacting rules. Every year nothing seems to agitate and unnerve the sport like tampering with them.
It is still figuring out what a catch is.
For several recent seasons, the N.F.L. has attempted to legislate the most jarring collisions out of the game, hits that were once not only legal but celebrated. The league has instituted penalties for hits on what it calls “defenseless” players. Nearly an entire page of the rule book is now devoted to what defenders cannot do to the quarterback, painstaking instructions that even ask defenders to avoid falling on the quarterback while tackling him.
The N.F.L. has also zeroed in on the safety of the helmet itself, with laboratory testing this spring leading to the banning of 10 helmet models and the ranking of 24 other models.
But none of these efforts have provoked the kind of tumult that this year’s helmet rule has spawned as the league tries to balance its inherent ferocity with the practical imperative of keeping its high-priced work force functioning.
Since the passage of the rule in the spring, the N.F.L. has worked to inform players, coaches and fans about what everyone in the league is calling “the helmet rule.” Alberto Riveron, the league’s senior vice president for officiating, delivered a presentation on the details of the new edict at the league’s annual meeting in May, and the N.F.L. also posted a video of Riveron’s talk on its website.
As Riveron emphasized, while other recent, new rules on contact have forbidden the most brutal helmet-to-helmet hits — and almost exclusively penalized defensive players — the 2018 rule pertains to any offensive or defensive player who initiates contact with his helmet against any part of an opponent, from the head to the lower body.
If that message did not get through, in August, on the eve of the first preseason games, the league tried another informational salvo when it issued a fact sheet about the rule that also included a series of explanatory videos prepared by N.F.L. head coaches to elucidate what is an accepted tackle and what is now unacceptable.
But the uproar has continued unabated, in part because the contact that was flagged in last month’s preseason games varied greatly and at times seemed to contradict the rule as written. Less than five minutes into the first game of the preseason, Baltimore linebacker Patrick Onwuasor was penalized under the rule in what was clearly a headfirst hit. But later in the game, two other Ravens were whistled for the same infraction and at least one appeared to be a shoulder-first tackle with incidental helmet contact.
On Aug. 11, an Indianapolis Colts safety, Shamarko Thomas, became the first player ejected from a game under the rule after an egregious helmet-to-helmet hit on a diving, defenseless wide receiver (see video below). In what may or may not have been a statement, two days later, Thomas was cut by the Colts.
A week later, Arizona’s Travell Dixon appeared to be going out of his way to keep his head up and made an open-field tackle on a wide receiver by lunging forward with his chest and shoulder. A millisecond later, Dixon’s helmet, inches from his shoulder pads, made contact with the opponent as well. A yellow flag fluttered to the turf.
Dixon rose from the tackle and waved his hands in the air as if to say: What more could I have done to avoid using my head?
By Aug. 22, the N.F.L. issued a clarification. While standing by the new rule, league officials added that “inadvertent or incidental contact with the helmet and/or face mask” would not be a foul.
It did not quell the controversy, probably because finding a way to completely remove head contact from football has proved to be more challenging than N.F.L. officials may have expected, especially when it comes to tackling. Also, the clarification asked game officials, in a split-second, to determine whether a helmet-first hit was intentional or inadvertent, a slippery slope generally avoided.
“The more layers you add, the more difficult it becomes to implement a rule consistently,” said Dean Blandino, a Fox Sports rules analyst who until last year oversaw officiating for the N.F.L.
Even the wide receivers, who stand to benefit the most from the rule, are expressing some sympathy for their defensive counterparts.
“Some of those calls we’re seeing, you say, ‘Come on, man,’ ” Ravens wide receiver Willie Snead said last month. “I get it that they’re trying to be safe and protect players, and I can appreciate that because I’ve taken a big helmet-to-helmet hit.
This summer, when the N.F.L. sent its referees to team training camps to help assuage the concerns of players and coaches, the move often backfired, with more exasperation and confusion ensuing.
If that is true, the shift in the landscape continues to happen slowly, with some willing to adapt and others less accepting of change.
Andrew Sendejo, a hard-hitting safety for the Minnesota Vikings who was suspended for one game last season for a collision that sent an opposing receiver into the N.F.L.’s concussion protocol, has taken a different approach.
Early in the Vikings’ training camp, he wore a baseball cap embossed with a message: Make Football Violent Again.