Welcome back to the climate newsletter, where we’ve got fierce storms of news for you. Hurricane Florence slammed into the Carolinas and Typhoon Mangkhut has hit the Philippines and now South China.
If you’re wondering about what kind of trouble the record-breaking rainfall from Florence might cause, take a look at this map of the region’s coal ash ponds, lagoons of pig waste, Superfund sites and chemical plants. We’ve been updating it with news of, for example, the breach of one coal ash pond’s retaining wall in North Carolina. (Coal ash contains mercury, arsenic and other toxic substances.) There have also been overflows at several hog farm lagoons in the state.
Also be sure to check out this video about the links between climate change and hurricanes from Kendra Pierre-Louis.
You can read Somini Sengupta’s interview with the governor here, where he calls for “almost a quasi-religious conversion” to move society to action.
Keep reading for tips on what you can do to prepare for flooding where you live.
There’s a new eye in the sky, and it’s for ice. NASA’s newest satellite, ICESat-2, will give researchers their sharpest look ever at melting glaciers, ice sheets and sea ice, which make up much of the Earth’s frozen regions and which are collectively known as the cryosphere. All that melting ice contributes to sea level rise, and ICESat-2 will provide important information about how quickly it’s happening.
Since this is ICESat-2, you know there was an earlier ICESat: It launched in 2003 and operated until 2009. Since then, NASA has been taking measurements from airplanes flying over Greenland and Antarctica, a stopgap program known as Operation IceBridge.
NASA isn’t simply replacing the old satellite, which measured the elevation of the Earth’s ice with a single laser beam; it’s also upgrading it. The new gizmo has six lasers, firing 10,000 times a second. All those pulses of light will give this satellite astonishing precision. While the previous satellite took measurements that were spaced apart roughly over the length of a football field at each end zone, the new one will measure between each yard line.
NASA says it will be able to measure the change in elevation of the ice sheets in Antarctica and Greenland to about a sixth of an inch, less than the width of a pencil. That will help scientists develop a better sense of how much and how quickly that ice is melting in a warming world.
Tom Neumann, deputy project scientist for the new satellite, said it would provide “a phenomenal picture” of changes in the planet’s ice sheets and water. “It’s going to enable science discoveries in the cryosphere and polar research for years to come,” he said.
And while we’re thinking about hurricanes, here’s what you can do to prepare for flooding in your own back yard, whether from hurricanes, inland flooding or other disasters.
The first thing you need to know about flooding is whether your home is in a risky place. The simplest way to find out is to check FEMA’s database of flood maps, where you can type in your home address and see your degree of risk and whether your home should have flood insurance. The system isn’t perfect; in some parts of the country, the maps are outdated, and climate change is causing downpours in many areas to be more intense because of the additional moisture in the warmer air. So checking out the FEMA maps is only a start.
Beyond knowing where you stand, you should know how to run — that is, how to evacuate in case of emergencies. Getting to safety in case of a hurricane, inland flood, forest fire or other emergency takes careful planning beforehand. FEMA has good guides at www.ready.gov for getting away from it all. Some of the advice includes knowing your routes, and preparing a “go bag” of food, water and supplies, as well as a cache of copies of personal documents like IDs and insurance records.
We hope it doesn’t happen to you! But better safe than, well, you know.
