More than half of American 3-year-olds, and a third of American 4-year-olds, did not attend preschool in 2016, according to the National Center for Education Statistics. Ensuring access to quality early education has been a major goal of policymakers in recent years. Most federal and state money is earmarked for children from low-income households, though cities such as New York and Washington have started free prekindergarten programs that are open to all children.
It is unclear how many schools Mr. Bezos’ network will consist of, where they will be located and whether they will cooperate or compete with existing Montessori programs that aim to serve children from low-income families. Those schools are typically funded through a mix of taxpayer dollars, philanthropic support and tuition from parents who can afford to pay.
Of the 5,000 Montessori schools in the United States, only about 10 percent are public. Tuition at private Montessori preschools in urban centers can reach $30,000 per year. For schools, the start-up costs are significant, with a full set of Montessori materials costing between $25,000 and $50,000 per classroom.
Mr. Bezos said his schools would be “full scholarship,” implying, some observers thought, that the network would be fully private, with seats reserved for poor children, as opposed to a more common public-private partnership, with an integrated mix of students from different backgrounds.
A model that forgoes government dollars and parent tuition would most likely serve fewer children than the hybrid approach. But it would also free Mr. Bezos from some of the bureaucratic burdens that public schools must contend with.
An Amazon spokesman, Drew Herdener, declined to answer questions about plans for the preschools.
Some Montessori advocates said that despite their mystification over the details, they were thrilled with news of the fund and its potential to inspire policymakers and other donors.
With little else to parse, Montessori leaders pored over Mr. Bezos’ brief statement, which described the planned schools as “Montessori-inspired.” The term “Montessori” is not copyrighted, and any school can choose to describe itself as such.
Some research, however, shows that Montessori classrooms that hew closest to the original principles of the movement’s founder, Dr. Maria Montessori, are more effective at raising student achievement than programs with a looser approach.
Mr. Bezos attended a Montessori preschool in Albuquerque in the 1960s and is one of several tech industry leaders with personal ties to the method. The Google founders, Sergey Brin and Larry Page, have attributed some of their success to their Montessori educations. Dr. Montessori’s reframing of child’s play as “work,” driven by the child’s choices and interests, is, in many ways, a natural fit for Silicon Valley’s culture of founder-driven entrepreneurship and innovation.
But the movement has always faced challenges in appealing to parents who desire a more traditional education for their children. In a classic Montessori school, teachers generally do not lecture in front of the classroom and instead impart lessons on phonics or counting by engaging students individually or in small groups. They may invite children to participate in an activity, but do not require them to do so.
Montessori has the image as “this cultish thing” for middle-class and wealthy families, Dr. Whitescarver acknowledged. But the movement has long tried to serve a more diverse group of children. In 1907, Dr. Montessori opened her school Casa dei Bambini, or Children’s House, in a poor neighborhood in Rome.
The first Americans to embrace Montessori were in fact affluent, white suburbanites. But by the 1960s, black and Latino parents were opening Montessori schools in many cities, attracted by the idea that a child-centered education could combat racism. Those programs often had trouble winning the philanthropic support they needed to survive, according to Mira Debs, executive director of the education studies program at Yale.
Faybra Hemphill, director of racial equity, curriculum and training at City Garden Montessori School in St. Louis, said she was curious to see what the Bezoses have planned. On a small scale, City Garden is already doing the work Mr. Bezos said he aspired to; about 40 percent of the school’s students come from low-income families and half are nonwhite.
Ms. Hemphill said she had some advice.
