With two more high-profile plays opening in New York this season — and a huge movie deal in the works — Theresa Rebeck’s time may have come.
Sarah Bernhardt ran her own theater. Correction: She owned her own theater, which she also ran. It had a dressing room that was actually five rooms, with a marble fireplace. Writers like Victor Hugo and Edmond Rostand lined up to create new works for her. And if Bernhardt preferred to perform a classic, she could put on tights and play Hamlet for an audience of 1,700.
This was in 1899.
Can you blame Ms. Rebeck for wanting to spend a bit of time in the imperious, world-beating presence of the Divine Sarah?
And so she has trained her love for robust storytelling and her fondness for strong women on Bernhardt’s protracted mission to make sense of Hamlet. The result, the playful but pointed “Bernhardt/Hamlet,” opens Sept. 25 at the American Airlines Theater, starring Janet McTeer in both title roles.
“This is a story about a mighty woman for whom I have a lot of respect,” she said.
Even by her pedal-to-the-metal standards, Ms. Rebeck, 60, is commanding a lot of attention right now. “Bernhardt/Hamlet,” a Roundabout Theater Company production now in previews, comes on the heels of “Seared,” an art-vs.-commerce look at the Brooklyn restaurant scene that ran to acclaim at the Williamstown Theater Festival.
Yet another newish work, the bracingly creepy family drama “Downstairs,” starts rehearsals in October at Primary Stages. The independent film “Trouble,” which Ms. Rebeck wrote and directed, opens Oct. 5 in New York and Los Angeles. And her new TV pilot, a Gamergate-themed comedy called “It’s a Man’s World” that she describes as “a reverse ‘Tootsie,’” begins filming this fall for YouTube Premium.
One more recent television stint was a lot harder to miss: a tempestuous turn as the creator and showrunner of the Broadway-themed “Smash,” from which she was fired after one season. As much as any event in her 30-year career, the dismissal is held up by many of her peers as Exhibit A of the difficulties that women face in entertainment.
Six years later, Ms. Rebeck’s shoulders still tensed at the mention of the series.
All those years in television have turned Ms. Rebeck — who has a 16-year-old daughter and a 22-year-old son with her husband, the former stage manager Jess Lynn — into a fast writer and even faster rewriter.
Ms. Rebeck said this quickness stemmed from her ability to go into what she called “character head.” In other words, she can enter each of her creations’ brains and come up with character-specific dialogue on the fly, a process she says has been compared to channeling.
Each of these four new works relies heavily on recognizable characters (even when they’re legendary theatrical figures like Bernhardt and Rostand, the “Cyrano de Bergerac” playwright and her purported collaborator/lover) behaving in recognizable ways (even when they’re shooting their own brother in the arm, which Anjelica Huston does to Bill Pullman in “Trouble”).
But there’s another force at work in her plays: a mix of high moral standards and empathy. Looking to fictional characters for insight into their creator’s psyche can be risky, but a line from Irene, the stultified housewife played by Ms. Daly in “Downstairs,” feels unusually apt.
Her television background may have honed her ability to tell a story through character, but her success in Los Angeles — at a time before every playwright with a flair for naturalism eyed a gig there — arguably did her few favors in theater circles. Like virtually everyone interviewed for this piece, Ms. Daly believes that sexism also affected the reception of her work.
Ms. Rebeck is more circumspect about what she feels is a gap between her work and the way it is received. “Earlier in my career, I would get, ‘Oh, she’s a feminist,’ with kind of a nasty spin to it,” she said. But she feels this is only part of the equation.
Perhaps even more than her success writing for television, her plays have the gall to resonate for the people sitting next to, in front of and (mostly) behind the critics. “Mauritius” and “Bad Dates” are among her works that have made American Theater magazine’s annual list of the most produced plays nationwide.
But for whatever reason or reasons, plenty of critics have had plenty to say about plenty of Ms. Rebeck’s works. And the sheer number of those works has also earned its share of scorn.
“We all remember that vicious review she received in The New York Times for ‘The Butterfly Collection,’” Ms. Howe said. “She called me up sobbing and said, ‘How do I deal with this sort of thing?’” Ms. Rebeck described the aftermath in vivid detail — albeit without naming the play or critic — in “Free Fire Zone.” It is as sobering a reminder as you will find that reviews have professional and personal consequences.
“Things have changed considerably for women in just the few years since then, and I think her experience might be a lot different now,” Ms. Huston said.
In addition to cofounding the Lilly Awards in 2010 to honor women in theater, Ms. Rebeck recently invited to her Park Slope brownstone the members of the Honor Roll, an advocacy group for female playwrights over the age of 40.
Despite her success, those years of condescension and worse are never far away. Just as she uses that “character head” to know intuitively what her characters will say and do next, Ms. Rebeck has no problem revisiting the prejudices of a different era, prejudices that muffled and contorted and at times snuffed out her own voice.
