An exhibit about the civil rights movement in Nashville proves Faulkner was right: The past isn’t dead. It isn’t even past.
That movement was the work of people who later became some of the most influential figures in the national struggle for civil rights: James Lawson, John Lewis, Z. Alexander Looby, Diane Nash. When people today think of the civil rights era in the South, they think of Birmingham, Ala. They think of Little Rock, Ark. They think of Forsyth County, Ga., which warned African-Americans passing through not “to let the sun go down on your head.” They don’t think of Nashville.
These are the stories Nashville tells itself again and again: We aren’t like the rest of the South. Dr. King said so.
Here’s what’s true: Nashville did not attack its own children with fire hoses, as Birmingham did. Tennessee did not call out the National Guard to integrate its universities, as Mississippi did. There is no “Bloody Sunday” in our history, as there is in the history of Selma, Ala. But our stories about the orderly desegregation of schools and the peaceful desegregation of lunch counters and the benign treatment of black people by the white people in power? That’s all a myth.
“We Shall Overcome: Civil Rights and the Nashville Press, 1957-1968,” a set of photographs assembled by the Frist Art Museum, exposes such mythmaking for what it is. The collection features work by photographers at Nashville’s two daily newspapers, The Tennessean and the now-defunct Nashville Banner, taken during the African-American struggle for civil rights in the city. Very few of these images were published; only a handful were seen by people of the time.
Part of the collection is on display in the museum’s ground-level public gallery, through which virtually all visitors pass. The full collection appears in a companion book just released by Vanderbilt University Press. Because of the violence depicted in them, the most troubling images appear only in the book. “As a mother of young children, I very conscientiously attempted to address the dark moments of the history, but without the images that may be viewed as most disturbing, especially for a family unprepared for what they were going to see or even participants in the movement who may still be traumatized by their experience,” said exhibit curator Kathryn Delmez.
Z. Alexander Looby, a civil rights attorney and Nashville City Council member, right, survived an early dawn bombing that destroyed his home in 1960. The remains of his house, left.Credit...Bob Ray/Nashville Banner Archives, Nashville Public Library, Special Collections (left); Jack Gunter. Nashville Banner Archives, Nashville Public Library, Special Collections , right.
The civil rights era in Nashville, in other words, was “peaceful” only in the context of the even greater brutality of our neighbors to the south.
For some time now, Nashville’s civic institutions have been issuing correctives to the persistent myth of peaceful integration here. The astonishing Civil Rights Room at the Nashville Public Library tells the whole story of African-Americans’ struggle for full civil rights in Nashville. The nonprofit organization Historic Nashville offers a tour of civil rights landmarks in the city. Last year, The Tennessean published a series of unvarnished stories about the conflicts of that time. In 2016, when Representative Lewis returned to Nashville to accept the Nashville Public Library Literary Award for his National Book Award-winning graphic memoir, “March: Book Three,” the mayor gave him prints of his first police mug shots, taken after his arrest at the lunch counter sit-ins and long believed to be lost to history. In Nashville, we no longer want our ugliest moments to be lost to history.
The photography exhibit at the Frist closes Oct. 14, but this record of Nashville’s past will endure: Copies of the companion volume to the photography exhibit will be distributed to all branches of the Nashville Public Library and to every public school in the city, and all members of the Tennessee General Assembly will receive a copy to deliver to the public libraries in their own communities. Here’s hoping they pause to take a look first. There’s a truth in these photographs that many of them have likely never seen before.