In Antwerp, the fashion designer Charlotte De Geyter and painter Ben Sledsens have created a fantastical world of their own.
The artist Ben Sledsens and the fashion designer Charlotte De Geyter met three years ago, while both were students at the Royal Academy of Fine Arts in Antwerp. In the time since, the couple has become virtually inseparable — and their work, which shares points of inspiration and a bright sensibility, has become increasingly intertwined. De Geyter has carved out a small atelier in their airy shared apartment in Antwerp’s Harmonie neighborhood. Just a few buildings down is the studio where Sledsens paints.
Arriving at his workspace means navigating an outdoor passage cramped with building materials and climbing an uneven flight of stairs that leads to a light-filled space brimming with artist-studio hallmarks — shelves stacked with monographs, a floor speckled with color drips à la Jackson Pollock and a table so caked with paint that it could be its own assemblage. The scene stealer, though, is a portrait of a young blond woman seated in front of a window at nightfall. A still-life arrangement occupies the foreground, but the picture’s focus is unmistakably the blonde, whose serene stare and relaxed hand placement are electrified by a neon green dress. The painting depicts the very same woman who is seated a few feet away, on the sofa across the room. The resemblance is uncanny, right down to the dress, which De Geyter designed and is wearing on this gray Saturday afternoon.
Neither De Geyter, 26, nor Sledsens, 27, seems distracted by the doppelgänger hovering on the wall. “It’s super cool, actually,” De Geyter says. “I like the way Ben sees things — and also his colors.” She also enjoys being able to decode some of the messages in the paintings. “There are these little details that I can recognize from our life,” she explains. Scattered throughout the room are several of Sledsens’s canvases ready to be hung for his solo show at Tim Van Laere Gallery. They contain references to the couple’s inside jokes and imagine their fantastical transformations into animals or fairy-tale figures. In one, De Geyter appears as the fish to Sledsens’s bird, a nod to “How to Catch a Fish,” the title of her final school collection from 2016. Her pieces’ ample shapes and tactile botanical motifs earned her the MoMu Award, the prize from Antwerp’s fashion museum. She was also offered a six-month internship in London by the fashion designer Simone Rocha, who was a guest judge.
Ben Sledsens’s exhibition “Two Trees” is on view at Tim Van Laere Gallery in Antwerp through October 20, timvanlaeregallery.com.