Opinion|The World Anti-Doping Agency Cleared Russia. Based on What?
The World Anti-Doping Agency Cleared Russia. Based on What?
Russia was supposed to express contrition and prove its drug testing protocols legitimate after the biggest doping scandal in international sports history. It has done neither.
Three years after Russia’s drug-testing agency was banned over one of the largest and most egregious state-sponsored doping schemes in the history of sport, it’s back in business, authorized by the World Anti-Doping Agency to certify that the same Russian athletes it so recently helped cheat are clean. It’s hard to know where to start on how outrageous that is.
After negotiating with the Russians over the summer, WADA announced last Thursday that it was, in effect, lifting its major conditions for Russia’s reinstatement — a full admission of the cheating and access to its stored urine samples — in exchange for a pledge to grant access to those samples by year’s end.
Faced with a deluge of outrage, much of it from athletes, WADA’s president, Craig Reedie, claimed this was the best way to get access to the samples WADA says it needs to complete its investigation into Russian doping. “My question to athletes is: What, in practice, is the alternative action to all the statements you have made?” he asked in a conference call with reporters on Monday.
Well, Sir Craig, let’s start with this alternative: Maintain the suspension until Russia fully acknowledges the government’s central role in the widespread cheating that was first laid bare by the former head of the Russian testing lab, Grigory Rodchenkov, and then confirmed in a report commissioned by WADA.
That report, by Richard McLaren, a Canadian law professor, inculpated Russia’s government sports organizations and the Russian Federal Security Service in an incredible scheme at the 2014 Winter Olympics in Sochi to swap dirty urine samples for clean ones through a hole in the testing lab wall. That in turn led to the suspension of the Russian drug-testing agency, Rusada (Motto: “For Clean and Fair Sport!”), and a host of individual sanctions by various sports federations. At the 2018 Winter Games, in South Korea, Russian athletes cleared to participate did so as “Olympic Athletes From Russia,” without their national flag.
WADA’s main demand for a lifting of the suspension was contrition. Yet instead of insisting that Russia acknowledge the findings of the McLaren report, WADA let it accept the conclusions of a far milder report.
Mr. Reedie argued that he ran out of levers to get access to the Russian lab, and that at least now Russians have made a solid commitment. But wasn’t suspending Rusada the lever? And was the primary goal of the suspension access to the Moscow laboratory, as Mr. Reedie now suggests, or was it that Russia come clean?
It’s not certain that the fury will have any effect. WADA and the I.O.C., of which Mr. Reedie is a member and which foots half of WADA’s budget, have a long record of closing their eyes to the misdeeds of powerful sports nations. They seem not to understand that condoning Russia’s cheating does irreparable damage to international sport.
WADA must promptly explain how it came to the decision to reinstate Russia and how it will ensure that Russia abides by the new condition. To make sure Mr. Reedie understands, Congress might note that the United States government’s annual check to WADA is for $2.3 million.