A real Democrat should replace Simcha Felder in Albany.
Few politicians have done more to block reform in Albany than State Senator Simcha Felder of the 17th District in Brooklyn. A Democrat, he has voted with Senate Republicans for years, giving them a one-seat majority since last spring that has let them obstruct legislation that could help clean up Albany and make the state a better, fairer place to live.
In Thursday’s primary election, Democrats can give their party’s nomination to a candidate who cares about their values: Blake Morris.
Mr. Morris, a lawyer who has been active in the community, has taken on the task of challenging Mr. Felder, who has worn the party’s label since he was first elected in 2012.
Mr. Felder has helped to stymie measures supported by a Democratic Assembly and a Democratic governor that would have strengthened tenants’ rights and women’s reproductive rights as well as mandated ethics reforms, voting reforms, campaign finance reforms, even speed cameras on streets around New York City schools.
He has also used his power in odd ways. He fought New York City’s plastic bag tax that would have brought revenue and cleaner streets to the city. He wanted to raise the speed limit in one area where the city was trying to limit traffic deaths. He even held up the entire state budget this spring to try to loosen city oversight of yeshivas.
Mr. Morris promises to work with fellow Democrats in the Senate to expand education funding, to help mend the transit system, to strengthen ethics and voting reforms and to protect health care and housing in the district. He calls himself the “real Democrat” in the race. We agree.
New York’s “fusion” voting allows a candidate to run in several parties at the same time. In the November general election, Mr. Felder will be listed on the Republican, Independence and Conservative lines, and Mr. Morris could be on the Working Families line, too.
In a year when Democrats are so close to taking control of the State Senate, it’s best that those in Brooklyn not give the party’s mantle in Thursday’s primary to a man who has already given up that fight. Democrats deserve to be represented by one of their own, and New Yorkers deserve a state senator who will work in their interests — that’s Blake Morris.
