In the year of #MeToo, Brett Kavanaugh’s nomination hearing set off outrage in the nation’s capital.
Mr. Winter is a staff photographer currently on assignment for Opinion.
Protests rocked Capitol Hill this week as women gathered from across the country in loud, impassioned opposition to Brett Kavanaugh's Supreme Court nomination, many spurred by their own experiences with sexual abuse.
There was a sense of urgency among them. They were going to be seen and heard no matter what.
Protesters marched around the Capitol to the steps of the Supreme Court, undeterred by the rain and cold. Some had posters that read, “We believe all survivors.” Others stood in silence outside the Dirksen Senate Office Building, with the words “Believe Women” written on their hands. A group roiled between Senate office buildings, fists raised, chanting “We believe her!” They were later arrested.
Christine Blasey Ford’s testimony resonated with many of those present. Women gathered in Senate offices sharing their personal stories, some for the first time. A woman wiped away tears in an overflow room where more than a hundred people had gathered to watch Dr. Blasey’s opening testimony on television screens. Those that weren’t able to get in, like 17-year-old Ansley Huff and her parents, watched on their phones outsides.
In a year of reckoning, and with the midterm elections looming, Judge Kavanaugh’s nomination is a critical test for a country grappling with the #MeToo movement against sexual violence.
Protesters in a hallway outside of the Senate Judiciary Committee meeting.
Kavanaugh supporters watched his opening testimony in the office of Senator Charles E. Grassley, the chairman of the judiciary committee.
A Kavanaugh supporter.
Ansley Huff watched Dr. Blasey's opening testimony with her parents.
Protesters marching through the Hart Senate Building atrium.
Observers watched Dr. Blasey’s opening testimony on television screens in the Dirksen Senate Building.
Rachel Mitchell, the prosecutor who questioned Christine Blasey Ford, as seen on television in a viewing room.
A protester being arrested for blocking a street outside the Supreme Court building.
Protesters in Washington, D.C. on Thursday.
Observers watching Dr. Blasey's testimony.
Additional reporting by Isvett Verde.