Illustrated. 237 pp. Penguin Press. $27.
To be photographed by Bill Cunningham, spontaneously, enthusiastically, on the street, put an extra skip into many a mode-ish step. The appearance of the resulting photo in one of Bill’s New York Times columns, On the Street or Evening Hours, was the fashion equivalent of a papal blessing. Why? Because Bill knew, and everyone knew that Bill knew. Exactly what did Bill know? It’s not entirely clear.
Bill was an enigma wrapped in a bright blue French sanitation worker’s jacket. When I saw him flying down Fifth Avenue on his trusty bicycle, flitting from event to runway, like a kingfisher on crack, relentlessly documenting the vanities of New York City, I often used to speculate about his inner dialogue.
“Fashion Climbing” is a record of Bill’s early years, found among his papers after his death in 2016. Set against a backdrop of postwar retail, high society and fashion, this obscenely enjoyable romp fills in part of the Cunningham back story and provides tantalizing peeks into the psyche of the guarded and mysterious Bill.
In 1933, Bill Cunningham’s mother came home to their “drab, puritanical” Boston Catholic enclave and caught her son vamping through the house in his sister’s pink organdy full-skirted dress. She gave him a beating. Bill was 4. Almost 90 years later, in the age of trans, it’s hard not to wince. But young Bill is undeterred. He charges ahead, living vicariously through his sisters, buying dresses and furs for his horrified mother, obsessively unpacking and examining her wedding gown, and frantically reimagining the family Christmas tree, in July. What was driving him? He describes it as “some devilish fire, flaming inside the deepest corners of my soul.” Was he sublimating homosexuality? Even as I write the question I can see the ghost of Bill — he has screeched to a halt on that bicycle and is dismounting — glowering reproachfully at me for indulging in such clunky Freudian speculation. Bill hailed from the never-complain-never-explain generation.
Retail provides an early outlet for his devilish fire. An after-school job at Jordan Marsh — “my favorite departments were better dresses, furs and handbags” — gave teenage Bill an opportunity to study fashion design and construction. When Bonwit Teller opens in Boston, Bill describes the process in detail, including the anti-Semitic missteps of the marketing campaign. Bill dives into the fray, making himself indispensable. In 1948, he walks away from a Harvard scholarship in order to join Bonwit’s training program in New York City, such is the ferocity of that devilish fire.
Bill’s quirky, unpretentious voice guides the reader through the postwar period of Manhattan glamour. Having got the measure of retail, he starts a millinery business using the name William J. (The omission of the last name was an attempt to minimize the cringings of his conventional family.) Designing, fabricating and selling hats instantly consumes his waking hours, with one major exception: fancy-pants costume parties. During this period, Bill concocts surreal and demented costumes for himself and his friends, involving, among other items, excitable chickens and a life-size papier-mâché elephant. Other than some accidental nudity and some unscheduled encounters with the cops, it’s all good, clean high-society fun. There is a notable absence of anything louche or hedonistic in this entire book.
Certain leitmotifs emerge to form the pillars of Bill’s eccentric personality. At the top of the list we have his self-imposed deprivations. In the early years, he allows himself a fur-collared trench, flamboyant shirts and ties, and Ollie, “a large black beatnik French poodle.” Over time these frou-frous fall away and his knees start to show through his worn pants. “I have the strongest desire to escape to the discomforts of the poor,” he declares, and he means it. Austerity becomes his drug of choice. He appears to make a contract with himself: I will remain in this world of glamour but only as a sack-cloth-and-ashes observer who lives on a diet of Ovaltine and leftover hors d’oeuvres, and stays in crummy Parisian hotels while others dine at the Ritz. His rationale? Independence. “Money’s the cheapest thing; freedom is the most expensive” was one of Bill’s favorite axioms.
On a related note, we have Bill’s make-do-and-mend, zero-waste sensibility. Costumes and hats are often made from discards and objets trouvés. Any garret, no matter how grim, can be transformed into a nifty salon de chapeaux with a dollop of white paint and some moth-eaten Austrian drapes bought from the Salvation Army. Just be sure to shake the cockroaches out of any hat before placing it on madam’s head.
In “Fashion Climbing,” madam is king. Men barely get a look-in. At the Dior show, we hear nothing of Monsieur Dior himself, only an orgasmic account of his muse and collaborator, the legendary Madame Bricard, “drenched and preserved in the artifice of fashion to the point where men were her slaves.” A young Yves Saint Laurent is glossed over while Coco Chanel — “that delicious 80-year-plus Witch of the West” — is described in hilarious detail. Surrounded by tyrannical divas, lethal vendeuses and “the star-spangled bitches” of fashion, Bill appears totally happy.
Authenticity is an obsession that runs throughout the book. Bill Cunningham delights in yanking back the curtain on the vicious rituals of copying that infiltrated the Paris salons of the postwar years. He discloses his own struggle — it reads like a milliner’s version of “The Pilgrim’s Progress” — to avoid the dominant influences of the day and create original work. When he leaves hats and becomes a reporter, plagiarists and designers who are resting on their laurels are called out. He judges fashion based on one simple criterion: What happens when frock meets client? Anybody can dress a rail-thin model. It takes talent and originality to transform real, average bodies into objects of fascination.
“Fashion Climbing,” with its truncated timeline, leaves the reader gasping for more. Bill remained at the center of the fashion circus until his death. In addition to his appreciation for grandes dames, he became a devotee of the unconventional, including punk, vogueing and drag, and designers like Alexander McQueen, John Galliano and the Belgian and Japanese avant-gardists. His visionary approach to street photography became the lingua franca of social media. His observations about fashion and culture sharpened over time. I can only hope there’s another installment lurking in his archives to give us further insights into the much-missed Bill and the devilish fire that raged hotter as the years went by.