Hanging near the offices of the top editors of The New York Times is a photo from 1958 featuring several women arranged around a desk. The women are sitting in an office of the ninth floor, away from the main newsroom, where they all worked for “Food, Fashions, Family, Furnishings” — the women’s news section in those days.
“Food, Fashions, Family, Furnishings” ran from 1955 to around 1971 as a one-page section in the paper on varying days of the week. Historically, women who came to The Times were immediately placed in the women’s pages, informally known as the “four Fs.” Nan Robertson, who worked in the four Fs for five years, wrote in her 1992 book, “The Girls in the Balcony,” that the section’s coverage “provided the sop to the people who bought space in a newspaper that elsewhere in its columns gave the news ‘impartially, without fear or favor, regardless of any party, sect or interest involved.’ ” It was hardly the first women’s section; a housekeeper’s column ran as early as the 1870s. Domesticity, however, was an abiding theme. There was even a kitchen at the far end of the floor.
Four F writers said they were overlooked by the rest of the paper. (Ms. Levin said the men from downstairs visited infrequently: “It was as if we kept the measles up on the ninth floor.”) But it fostered lifelong friendships among the women, many of whom later organized around the 1974 class-action sex discrimination suit against the paper led by Betsy Wade, The Times’s first female copy editor — who had been placed in the four Fs when hired. That suit ultimately changed women’s roles in the newsroom.
The four Fs staff of around 30 was mostly female, and, as with the rest of The Times in those days, mostly white. Elizabeth Penrose Howkins, who served as the section’s editor in chief from 1955 to 1965, sat in a glass cage in the middle of the desks, overseeing stories ranging from culinary interests (“News of Food: Subtleties of Veal”) to peculiarities in fashion (“Air Squeak in Shoe Is Hard to Remove”). In her office, she posted the page next to its greatest rival — the hybrid society and fashion section from The New York Herald Tribune, run by Eugenia Sheppard.
Editors would hang ideas on hooks, and if a story with a news peg came up, they would add it to the board.
Then came the class-action suit in 1974, which represented 600 women against the paper. The suit was settled in 1978, accompanied by an affirmative action plan requiring the hiring of a certain number of women in entry-level positions. In April 1978, Nancy Newhouse, who had previously worked for New York magazine, said she was hired “to update and freshen up the paper’s coverage” as head of the paper’s new “Living Style” department, which included the daily and Sunday family/style pages, the newly minted Living section and the Home section. The department of just over 40 people was made up mostly of women and housed within the newsroom.
Several of the women of the four Fs, including Ms. Levin, have remained friends over the years. Much has changed at The Times in the meantime, and women now make up nearly half the staff. That includes Penelope Green, Patricia Green’s daughter, who has sometimes joined the group for lunch. Ms. Green writes for the Styles section.
