Politics|More Migrant Families, and Guatemalans, Are Trying to Enter the U.S.
More Migrant Families, and Guatemalans, Are Trying to Enter the U.S.
WASHINGTON — They wade across the Rio Grande with inner tubes to reach American shores.
They walk through remote areas where the temperatures reach triple digits to evade immigration officials.
Some will never make it, drowning while crossing the river or perishing while trying to keep up with smugglers who have left them behind.
But despite the dangers, the migrants continue to come. Data released on Wednesday by Customs and Border Protection show that nearly 47,000 people were either apprehended by the Border Patrol or turned themselves in to customs officers last month at ports of entry along the Southwest border after traveling from mostly Central American countries.
Over all, the number of migrants who were caught or surrendered in August is lower than in early spring, when the figure exceeded 50,000 people a month between March and May. Yet the August numbers are still higher than July when just under 40,000 people cross the border illegally or requested asylum at the ports.
About 12,774 migrants, about 34 percent of the people apprehended by the Border Patrol, were in families with children. It is among the highest monthly tallies of families showing up at the border in the last five years, officials at Customs and Border Protection said.
An additional 3,181 people in families turned themselves in to customs officers.
The data also show that Guatemalans make up an increasingly larger share of migrants, alone or in families, who were apprehended or sought asylum. This year to date, about 42,757 Guatemalan migrants in families were apprehended by the Border Patrol, the data shows, the largest share of any country. Officials said it was unclear what was driving the increase in families or the high number of migrants from Guatemala.
Kevin K. McAleenan, the commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, called the increase in the number of families with children showing up at the border a humanitarian and security crisis. He said the agency does not have the ability to actually stop the crossings.
Officials said that 94,285 Central American migrants in families were apprehended at the border last year, but that about 99 percent of them remain in the country because the agency cannot quickly deport them. Many are waiting for their asylum cases to work their way through the immigration courts.
Elected in part by promising to crack down on illegal immigration, President Trump has been stymied in his efforts to stop the flow of immigrants along the Southwest border with Mexico.
His planned border wall has yet to be built. His demands to hire thousands of Border Patrol and Immigration and Custom Enforcement agents and officers have not been fully funded. And his administration — like those of previous presidents — has struggled to develop an immigration strategy that addresses the thousands of migrants who cross the border each month.
In April, the Trump administration announced a zero-tolerance immigration policy that sought to prosecute all people who illegally entered the United States. As a result, families crossing the border were initially separated, with children sent to hundreds of shelters around the country while their adult relatives were detained.
The separations prompted widespread outrage, and Mr. Trump eventually signed an executive order to keep children with their parents. But last week, the Department of Homeland Security issued new regulations to allow officials to indefinitely detain children with their parents while their cases go through immigration proceedings. Those rules, which defy a 1997 legal ruling that prohibits children from being detained for more than 20 days, are expected to be challenged in court.
Agents stationed along the Southwest border have sought to discourage migrants by describing the dangerous journey.
Signs on the wall at one Customs and Border Protection processing center in Laredo, Tex., warn of the perils of the trip. Officials there have also released audio of 911 calls by migrants seeking help after being abandoned by smugglers; in one, a man tells a dispatcher that his cousin was left behind after failing to keep up with migrants trying to avoid a Border Patrol checkpoint.
Border Patrol agents said they found the body of the cousin, a young woman from Guatemala, four days later, starting to decompose in the heat.
Some are luckier. The Border Patrol’s search-and-rescue unit in Laredo has saved dozens of migrants who were left to die in the searing temperatures.
During a patrol last month, two men and a young woman were found hiding in the scrub on a private ranch after being left without water. One man was unconscious and needed an intravenous injection. The woman was dehydrated and covered with cuts after trying to eat the fruit on a cactus.
Homeland Security and local law enforcement officials also note the number of people who have drowned trying to cross the Rio Grande.
Another Border Patrol agent reported finding a man’s body floating in the water. The body, which had not been identified, was just one of many agents said they had found during patrols along the river.
“We are trying to discourage people, but as long as there is the lure of being able to stay in the country, they are going to keep coming,” said Jason D. Owens, the acting chief of Border Patrol’s Laredo sector.
At the Border Patrol processing center, a Guatemalan immigrant in a holding cell said he had made the long journey to bring his 14-year-old son to a safer place. The man, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said his son was being recruited by gangs and other criminal organizations because there were few jobs in Guatemala.
The man said he had no desire to stay in the United States and welcomed being able to return home. “I just don’t want my son to go back,” he said.
