The new head of civil rights at the Education Department has reopened a seven-year-old case brought by a Zionist group against Rutgers University, saying the Obama administration, in closing the case, ignored evidence that suggested the school allowed a hostile environment for Jewish students.
The move by Kenneth L. Marcus, the assistant secretary of education for civil rights and a longtime opponent of Palestinian rights causes, signaled a significant policy shift on civil rights enforcement — and injected federal authority in the contentious fights over Israel that have divided campuses across the country. It also put the weight of the federal government behind a definition of anti-Semitism that targets opponents of Zionism, and it explicitly defines Judaism as not only a religion but also an ethnic origin.
And it comes after the Trump administration moved the American Embassy in Israel from Tel Aviv to Jerusalem, moved to cut off aid to the Palestinian Authority and announced the closing of the Palestine Liberation Organization’s office in Washington.
In a letter to the Zionist Organization of America, obtained by The New York Times, Mr. Marcus said he would vacate a 2014 decision by the Obama administration and re-examine the conservative Jewish group’s cause not as a case of religious freedom but as possible discrimination against an ethnic group.
In effect, Arab-American activists say, the government is declaring the Palestinian cause anti-Semitic.
A spokeswoman for Rutgers said the university had not received official notification from the Education Department yet, but “as always, we would certainly cooperate with the Department of Education should they decide to review the decision.” The letter is dated Aug. 27 but received no public notice.
When the initial complaint was filed in April 2011, the school had been trying to address brewing tensions over the B.D.S. movement — which advocates boycotting, divesting from and sanctioning Israel — that was roiling college campuses.
That month, the school hosted Omar Barghouti, a founding member of the Palestinian Campaign for the Academic and Cultural Boycott of Israel, and after his speech, in which he called for the university to distance itself from Israel, the school issued a statement assuring the college’s Hillel group that it would not, according to published reports.
Mr. Marcus, who was confirmed in June, was tapped to lead the Office for Civil Rights from his job leading the Louis D. Brandeis Center for Human Rights Under Law, a nonprofit advocacy organization that Mr. Marcus used to pressure campuses to squelch anti-Israel speech and activities.
The organization advocated revocation of federal funding from Middle East studies programs that are said to have an anti-Israel slant, and it urged colleges and universities to discipline students who are part of the B.D.S. movement.
When Mr. Marcus was nominated, Palestinian and human rights organizations protested his confirmation on the grounds that he would use his position at the Education Department to further his pro-Israel cause, and that first on his list would be pushing to adopt a definition of anti-Semitism to target schools for civil rights violations. Middle Eastern studies programs at universities around the country have braced for action from Washington against perceived bias.
Mr. Marcus conceded that his department did not have the authority to weigh in on religious or political disputes. But he made the case that the Rutgers case is neither.
Mr. Marcus’s decision took current and former investigators at the Education Department by surprise, as Ms. DeVos has gone to great lengths to limit civil rights enforcement to stringent interpretations of federal law.
“Thus, for example, O.C.R. aggressively investigates alleged race or ethnic harassment against Arab Muslim, Sikh and Jewish students,” the letter continued.
In a statement, the organization’s national president, Morton A. Klein, and Susan B. Tuchman, the director of its Center for Law and Justice, emphasized that Mr. Marcus’s notification that the Education Department had adopted the expansive definition of anti-Semitism was particularly noteworthy.
The organizers — who were not students — said they were forced to charge a last-minute fee to cover costs mandated by the university, including an increased price to rent the space and to cover security to manage the protests.
In dismissing the case in 2014, the Education Department determined that the host of the event advertised a $5 to $20 donation, and began charging last-minute fees because the event drew more attendees than anticipated, including many nonstudents.
In their findings letter, department investigators wrote that they had discovered no evidence that Jewish and non-Jewish attendees were selectively charged fees. They said the email that said “150 Zionists” had shown up — which was presented as evidence of the intended discrimination — was heavily redacted, and they could not verify whether that information was credible. The department said it determined from witness statements that all attendees were required to pay for the event if they were not a volunteer. The department also found that Rutgers promptly investigated complaints of bias filed by students.
“Regardless of whether or not it was appropriate to begin charging the admissions fee, O.C.R. did not find sufficient evidence to substantiate that any individuals were treated differently, based on national origin, with respect to imposition of the admissions fee,” the findings letter said.
The Zionist group appealed the finding.
In his letter, Mr. Marcus wrote that the email was sufficient enough for further investigation.
Mr. Marcus’s confirmation was opposed by more than 60 civil rights organizations who expressed concern that his view of civil rights, and whose should take priority, was too narrow.
Mr. Marcus supports scaled-back protections for transgender students and rejects that policies could have “disparate impact” on racial and other groups, and his organization has filed amicus briefs challenging affirmative action.
