The borough is building, and the bulk of new construction is still comparatively affordable. Just don’t call it the next Brooklyn.
When Marylou Heras first entered New York’s affordable housing lottery, she had to apply using pen and paper. That was 12 years ago.
Numerous applications later, her patience finally paid off: Last year, she and her three children qualified for a three-bedroom apartment at Summit Ridge, a new 58-unit building in the High Bridge section of the Bronx, where all the units are reserved for tenants making less than 60 percent of the area’s median income — about $24,000 to $54,000 for a family of four.
“A year later, and I’m still happy with my decision,” said Ms. Heras, 31, a patient-care coordinator who was born and raised in the area. She and her children moved just 10 minutes south of their last apartment, a two-bedroom in a mid-rise by Yankee Stadium, but the difference was stark.
Before, she paid $1,650 a month for a cramped two-bedroom in a building with a rodent problem; now she pays less than $1,200 for three bedrooms, in a new building with many of the bells and whistles of market-rate projects.
That it took so long for Ms. Heras to find an affordable home says much about the state of housing in New York. That she found it in the Bronx, once a symbol of urban blight, says something locals have known for years: The Boogie Down is on the rise. Now the rest of the city is catching on.
The borough has come a long way since 1931, when Ogden Nash wrote the derisive couplet “The Bronx? No Thonx.” From Riverdale in the north to Mott Haven in the South, the Bronx is bursting with new development, much of it geared toward affordable housing — or some semblance of it.
A $165 million deal that closed last week in the South Bronx, perhaps the borough’s largest private development, could bring about 1,300 new rentals to the industrial waterfront, of which 30 percent will be affordable. The recent rezoning of more than 90 blocks along Jerome Avenue, which cuts through the poorest congressional district in the country, could bring 4,000 new low- and middle-income apartments.
New infrastructure, including four proposed Metro-North Railroad stops, and the recent introduction of a new ferry line, is expected to spur building. And a new federal provision, buried in last year’s tax overhaul, could incentivize even more housing in impoverished neighborhoods by offering tax benefits to investors.
The Bronx remains the poorest borough in the city, with a median household income of $37,525, compared to Manhattan, the richest borough, where the median is $77,559, according to a census analysis by Social Explorer, a research firm. Critics argue that many ostensibly affordable units will still price out locals, whose per capita income is under $20,000, and that new luxury buildings will raise rents further. But even as gentrification looms, the borough offers some of the last remaining bargains in the city, for locals and newcomers alike.
The Bronx’s revival has been heralded for years, but now it may be taking hold. In an analysis of Department of Buildings records for the last year through July 1, seven out of 20 neighborhoods with the most approved new residential units were in the Bronx — more than in any other borough, according to Localize.city, a data firm that analyzes New York housing. Long Island City in Queens topped the neighborhood list with 1,436 new units, followed by East New York in Brooklyn (1,200) and Melrose in the Bronx (1,027).
The pace of development is also accelerating. From 2010 to 2015, about 13 percent of all approved apartments were in the Bronx. Last year, the share jumped to 24 percent, and in the first half of 2018, the borough had 27 percent of all new units, said Israel Schwartz, a data scientist with Localize.city.
Seven of the top 20 neighborhoods for approved units between July 1, 2017, and July 1, 2018 are in the Bronx.
cross bronx EXPWY.
But unlike Brooklyn — a common utterance here — the construction still leans toward subsidized housing: 58 percent of the apartments were publicly funded last year, according to the borough president’s office.
“The Bronx is sort of the secret of New York’s affordable housing market,” said Daniel Marks Cohen, a vice president at the NYC Housing Partnership, a nonprofit that works with the city and developers on below-market-rate projects. Of 28 affordable projects on the group’s slate, about half of them are in the Bronx, he said.
That is beginning to change. In Mott Haven, a new luxury building called Bridgeline has begun leasing 91 units that range in price from $1,694 for a studio to $3,138 for a two-bedroom. Designed by Aufgang Architects, the project will include a two-toned industrial facade visible from Upper Manhattan.
“I didn’t do any market-rate rentals until 2012,” said Josh Weissman, president of the Bronx-based JCAL Development Group, one of the developers. This is the company’s biggest one yet. Affordable housing is still the bulk of its business, he said — including the Summit Ridge in High Bridge — but rising land prices, especially in the South Bronx, are changing the mix.
Brookfield Property Group, a newcomer to the Bronx but a major player in Manhattan, has just closed on a 1.3 million-square-foot waterfront site in Mott Haven, dotted with parking lots and low-rise industrial buildings, for $165 million. The company plans to build seven new towers of up to 25 stories with a mix of retail, commercial space and roughly 1,300 apartments. Construction will not begin until mid-2019, but the company is already scoping out other land deals, said Ben Brown, the head of New York development.
“We think we’ve got enough critical mass to create a neighborhood,” he said of an area that remains mostly industrial. It is too soon to determine pricing, he added, but 30 percent of the units will have income limits and will be offered through an affordable housing program.
Prices ranged from about $2,100 for a studio to $4,800 for the largest three-bedroom, in an area where the median market-rate rent was $2,308 in July, according to the real estate website StreetEasy. The priciest units, including the penthouse, are still for rent.
To justify the luxury prices, the developers focused on amenities: an indoor pool with a skylight, a gym and yoga space, a steam room and “quiet rooms” on every floor, for those who work from home. Ms. Eisenberg said the building has attracted many renters from other boroughs and Westchester County who work in the area, including doctors, teachers and some hip-hop artists.
Still, this luxury push in the South Bronx remains an outlier in a borough where much of the development caters to middle- and low-income residents.
“I came to realize there was no place like home, and I wanted to stay in the Bronx,” said Ms. Sabio, who has a lifestyle website called Blogger from the Bronx.
She was lucky. More than 58,000 applications were filed for 58 units in the building, said Gerry Puente, of Wavecrest Management, the company that handled the lottery process.
Many renters also face a shortage of apartments for which they qualify. Neomi Beltrez, 36, a public-school teacher, was turned down for a below-market-rate apartment in 2015, because her income was too low for an apartment big enough for her and her two teenage sons. She received a promotion just in time to qualify the following year for a more expensive three-bedroom apartment in Melrose. The building, a 12-story project that was once an unsightly vacant lot, was developed by Trinity Financial for tenants who make 40 to 80 percent of the area’s median income, or $37,560 to $75,120 for a family of three. She pays $1,184 a month.
Some fear the affordability gap is widening, despite the city’s efforts.
“Not only is it inadequate, it’s not aimed at the people who live here now,” said Fitzroy Christian, a longtime Bronx resident and member of Community Action for Safe Apartments, or CASA, a community advocacy group. Mr. Christian points to the recent rezoning of the Jerome Avenue corridor, which includes part of the poorest congressional district in the country, with a median household income of just over $29,200.
While the city expects some 4,000 new affordable rentals to rise along the more-than-90-block stretch, much of it occupied by auto body shops, Mr. Christian said most current residents will not qualify for the apartments, because the apartments target higher income tiers. Autoworkers are among the highest paid residents in the area, he added, and the rezoning will likely displace most of them.
The new development will encourage locals to stay in the borough, he said, while also bringing needed infrastructure to the area.
units in the year ending July 1, 2018.
Unrelated to the rezoning, four Metro-North Railroad stations are being planned for the east Bronx, in Hunts Point, Parkchester/Van Nest, Morris Park and Co-op City, and could be ready as early as 2022, he said. And a new ferry line that connects Soundview to Manhattan opened this summer.
But the Bronx is vast, and new development is also reaching more affluent precincts, like Riverdale in the north. There, too, apartment seekers are finding more affordable homes, at least in comparison to those in other boroughs.
At Skyview, a complex of more than 1,300 units built in the 1960s, the developer Myles Horn and ABC Properties have bought a block of 176 rental units to be converted into high-end co-ops. So far, they have renovated and listed about 20 units, ranging from $309,000 for a one-bedroom to the high $800,000s for a four-bedroom apartment, said Susan Goldy, of Halstead, who is leading sales. By comparison, the median price for a one-bedroom apartment in Manhattan was $899,900 in July, according to StreetEasy.
The 23-acre property, which includes tennis courts, an outdoor pool and a cafe, overlooks the Hudson River and is near a Metro-North station. “It’s country club living for the middle class,” Ms. Goldy said. And the neighbors are disarmingly polite.
“We’ve already met more people in Riverdale than we have in six years living on the Upper West Side,” said Missy Crawford, 43, who bought a 1,200-square-foot, three-bedroom apartment in the complex for $725,000, with her fiancé, John Adamek, 42, an architect.
Ms. Crawford, a vice president of creative and marketing for the WNBC television station, said they could not afford anything larger than 800 square feet in Manhattan, and with Mr. Adamek’s three young children, they needed more space.
Granted, night life is lacking in the area, they said, and the water aerobics class in the pool skews older, but for the price and the quality of the space, nothing in Manhattan compares.
