What Happens When a Single Art Project Becomes a Decades-Long Obsession?
Rodin and Duchamp toiled away on pieces for spectacular lengths of time. But in an era of digital hyperdrive, fidelity to one work seems even more heroic.
Soon after, Longo began to translate the memory into a sculpture that he is still working on to this day. He began designing a life-size replica of a 159-foot-long 767-223ER, with an epoxy-resin charcoal-blackened exterior, which he planned to show someday at the Deichtorhallen museum in Hamburg, Germany, where its fuselage would command the entire central space, one wing jutting through the building’s arched windows like a charred limb. Viewers would maneuver around the piece, leaving footprints in the charcoal dust. Longo always imagined displaying the work in Hamburg because Atta had lived there; a friend of Longo’s had, some years before the attacks, been a passenger in Atta’s taxi and had forgotten in the back seat a gift for his young daughter, which Atta had demanded money to return.
ANY SERIOUS ART requires prodigious commitment. Ambitious works can take years. But there is dedication to one’s craft, and then there is what many might call obsession, the decades-long fixation on a consuming project. Sometimes the work remains unfinished forever, but even those that eventually reach fruition take their toll: Both the piece and the artist can end up, in the words of Michael Heizer — who has worked for 46 years on “City,” a mile-plus-long, as yet unrealized minimalist compound of ramps, slabs and chasms in the Nevada desert — “torqued and twisted” forever.
Artists throughout history have worked on single pieces for spectacular lengths of time. Auguste Rodin worked for 37 years on “La Porte de l’Enfer,” a set of carved doors with more than 180 figures inspired by Dante’s “Divine Comedy,” commissioned in 1880 for a Paris design museum that was never built. Marcel Duchamp spent the last 20 years of his life secretly toiling in his Greenwich Village studio on the installation “Étant Donnés” (1966). The world thought he had officially retired from art to concentrate on competitive chess, but it turns out he was also concocting a room-size fantasia of sticks, aluminum, parchment and plastic clothespins, with a splayed female nude at its center. Duchamp considered the piece finished, but it was not exhibited until a year after his death in 1968. Installed permanently at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, it was designed to be glimpsed through a peephole in a heavy wooden door, as if the work itself were meant to remain a secret.
These kinds of efforts have long been acknowledged as much for the otherworldly patience they require as for their artistry. But in an era of digital hyperdrive, the meticulous, even tedious work that once went into art has been largely replaced by a keystroke, and attention spans have shrunk to virtually nothing. The notion of a contemporary artist pledging fidelity to a single work over decades now seems even more heroic.
A work of art, then, is never completed so much as it is forever evolving, like a child. And like a child, an artwork requires attention, concern, respect, love — even though (unlike a child), it can’t return these emotions. Certain artists build the concept of a long gestation period into the work itself: “Black Square XVII,” an installation by Taryn Simon at the Garage Museum of Contemporary Art in Moscow, is currently an empty shelf in the museum, reserved for a chunk of vitrified nuclear waste once its radioactive properties have diminished to a level safe for human exposure — about 1,000 years from now, in 3015.
The living icons of such effort are the trio of Heizer, Charles Ross and James Turrell. Each has worked almost constantly on their defining chef-d’oeuvre for at least 40 years; at this point, their efforts have arguably tipped over into performance art. “City” has reportedly cost Heizer — or rather, his funders, including the 86-year-old 3M heir and patron Virginia Dwan and the Dia Foundation — as much as $25 million. (The artist now says he will be finished by 2020.) Since 1977, Turrell has been laboring on Roden Crater, a 400,000-year-old extinct volcano in the Northern Arizona desert, slowly turning it into what he has called a “controlled environment for the experiencing and contemplation of light.” In the first phase of construction alone, he moved 1.3 million cubic yards of earth.
In an early morning phone call from the site of “Star Axis,” his 11-story naked-eye observatory of sculptural forms in dirt, granite, sandstone, bronze and steel on a mesa in the New Mexico desert, Ross, the most accessible and voluble of the three men, insists that the project he began 47 years ago will be done by 2022. (But, he concedes, “I’ve been saying it will be finished in three or four years for 20 years now.”) By many accounts, he does seem close to finishing the work, which can host six people at a time in a guesthouse on the property. One by one, visitors will scale the thousands of steps up an ascending tunnel toward an opening that will align them with the earth’s axis, witnessing the progression of the stars over a cycle of 26,000 years. Although he has private support, last year Ross sold his Manhattan loft to partially finance a foundation that will maintain the site for perpetuity.
Unsurprisingly, perhaps, such artists tend to live at the “intersection of narcissism, obsession and megalomania,” says James Crump, who directed “Troublemakers,” a 2016 documentary about the land art movement. “You have to wonder if there isn’t an element of not being able to face the finish.” In any case, the artists themselves wind up as profoundly transformed as the landscape, for good and bad. Heizer’s wife, the artist Mary Shanahan, who was instrumental to “City,” left him four years ago, presumably depleted by the ordeal and the relationship. Not long before, he nearly died from chronic neural and respiratory problems, and developed a morphine addiction from the pain treatment. The work can start to overtake everything else, to serve as a stand-in for reality, a kind of escape from everything that isn’t the work itself. There is something attractive about continuing to tinker with a piece — perhaps superfluously — to stay in a suspended state of artistic nirvana in which the work can simply continue and the end never has to come.
