MARSEILLE, France — The nearly 20-year-old images have entered French folklore: peasants, farmers and ex-hippies dismantling a rural McDonald’s, panel by panel, in what became a symbol of France’s resistance to American fast food.
The plan for this McDonald’s? Sell it to a Muslim halal food operator who aims to provide Middle Eastern food. The employees, many themselves Muslim and North African, are outraged.
The object of their improbable affection is a squat low-rise box in the Saint-Barthélémy neighborhood, in the city’s far north, miles from the pastel-hued port. It is marooned by highway construction on a projected bypass, at the edge of a choked traffic circle.
Although the French invented a word, malbouffe, or “bad feed,” to negatively capture the fast-food experience, saving the McDonald’s here has become a cause. Last week, Marseille’s mayor, Jean-Claude Gaudin, announced his support for the employees.
“It seems to me that a company as big as McDonald’s, which received financial help during the construction of the bypass, can make an effort in an our northern neighborhoods to stay in business and preserve jobs,” he said.
On Monday, the employees were in court to argue that their restaurant and five other Marseille McDonald’s should not be sold because of the potential risk to jobs and benefits from new owners. The other restaurants would continue under the golden arches, just owned by a new franchisee.
A decision in the case is expected on Friday.
The neighbors of the Saint-Barthélémy McDonald’s — boxy, off-white, six-story cement housing projects with difficult reputations — are hardly more picturesque than the fast-food restaurant.
Outside the project buildings, nervous drug-dealer scouts keep a watchful eye for strangers, even as they salute the militant unionists at the restaurant. A shootout with kalashnikovs in broad daylight this spring, outside an elementary school and filmed by a resident, is a fresh memory.
Inside the McDonald’s, families consume Happy Meals.
The two worlds are not mutually exclusive and that is the whole point, the workers say.
The Saint-Barthélémy McDonald’s is not like others, they earnestly argue — particularly not like those in America. Since its ceremonious opening by France’s labor minister in 1992, the restaurant has served as a “social shock absorber” for the neighborhood, said Mr. Grabsi, the teacher who worked there in younger days.
The McDonald’s is Saint-Barthélémy’s second largest employer, after a supermarket chain, and a start in the world of employment for largely Muslim youth, often victims of employment discrimination. Judges have been known to reduce jail sentences for those promised jobs there. Some have even been sent to work wearing ankle bracelets to track their whereabouts.
“When there’s a problem with delinquents, we find them a job here,” said Mr. Grabsi, speaking of his students.
People come for a first job and stay for years, building careers and families in an area with few other opportunities besides drug-dealing. Fabrice Elbaz, the operations manager, has been there 25 years.
Mr. Guemari, who is leading the push to keep the McDonald’s open, recalled sleeping on benches at the port and the train station before coming to work in his early days at the restaurant.
McDonald’s corporate headquarters in France would not comment on the restaurant. A spokesman provided an email from the local franchise operator, Jean-Pierre Brochiero.
“As for the restaurant in Saint-Barthélemy, the best option to continue to support 70 restaurant managers and crew is to sell this restaurant to an outside buyer,” Mr. Brochiero said.
Ralph Lindauer, the lawyer for the McDonald’s employees, acknowledged that the Saint-Barthélémy restaurant had suffered “undeniable losses,” even before the highway work.
No McDonald’s executive has met with the employees here, nor have they met the new owner.
