Bruce Haight takes us back.
TUESDAY PUZZLE — Administrivial alert! Thank you for your patience with the comments. There is currently a sitewide outage of the comment system and other systems having to do with something outside The New York Times. The community team is aware of the situation and is working on fixing it as soon as possible.
Travel back in time with us, as Bruce Haight relives a certain decade. I’ve embiggened my hair for the occasion.
A smooth solve over all, with a bit of a tug-of-war with the theme entries until I figured out what was going on.
17A: Of historical interest: The common phrase ALL TOGETHER has not been seen in The New York Times Crossword for 42 years, and only once.
57A: Even if you don’t watch “Suits” or “Mr. Robot,” it’s fairly easy to get the USA Network from the crossings. I had the Down entries ACUTE and WORLD CLASS, giving me the U and the A, so it was easy to drop in the S.
11D: Wordplay alert! “One involved with a grand opening?” made me laugh. It’s not the grand opening of a store we are thinking about but rather the opening of a grand piano. The answer is PIANO TUNER.
35D: I once made the mistake of referring to those unsolicited ads you receive in the mail as JUNK MAIL to someone in direct advertising, and was rewarded with a very strongly worded lecture on the apparent (to them) difference. 
Today’s theme consists of four phrases and a revealer. The phrases consist of two words, the first word starting with the letter A and the second starting with the letter T.
The revealer, THE EIGHTIES, is a phonetic hint to the phrases. The A-Ts, get it?
This puzzle was accepted two years ago, but I remember working for quite a while with just EIGHTIES as a revealer, and then being really happy to expand it to THE EIGHTIES. It’s interesting to think about what “the” phrases are really “crossworthy” — for example, Jeff Chen’s word list includes THE F.B.I., THE D.E.A., THE G.O.P., THE F.A.A., THE C.I.A., THE B.B.C., THE N.B.A., THE N.F.L., THE N.H.L., and THE U.S.A. If you put “the abc” or “the xyz” into Google they get a lot of hits, but those are clearly not “crossworthy.” It’s hard to know where to draw the line, but THE EIGHTIES is definitely a thing in my book.
I like this puzzle, but if I had it to do over again, I would try to work ANKLE TATTOO and ALRIGHTY THEN in there, and I would get rid of OLLA in the northwest.