Every Monday, the Times TV critic Margaret Lyons picks the best of what’s ahead before the weekend. Check back each week for more recommendations.
Easily the best comedy on network TV and one of the best comedies on TV, period, is back for its third season, starting with a two-part episode in which our ridiculous Scooby gang gets another chance at life on earth. I love this show so much that when I realized the episode I was watching was 44 minutes long, not 22, I said, “Yay!” out loud.
This return to their one-time selves allows us to see everyone in his or her lousiest state, with Eleanor (Kristen Bell) rattling off all the worst parts about Arizona, Chidi (William Jackson Harper) incapacitated by indecision, Tahani (Jameela Jamil) dropping celebrities’ names at every opportunity and Jason (Manny Jacinto) believing that “claustrophobic” means “afraid of Santa Claus.”Seasons 1 and 2 of “The Good Place” are available on Netflix; definitely start at the beginning. There’s an elaborate and well-constructed internal mythology that builds on itself.
This is the big week for new and returning shows. Unfortunately, almost all of the fall pilots are crummy. On Monday, the “Magnum P.I.” pilot is a snooze, and “Manifest,” the missing-plane drama, is even worse.
On Tuesday, watching “F.B.I.” and “New Amsterdam” feels like wearing borrowed underwear — technically acceptable in an emergency, but no one would choose to live like this. (Read the Times review here.) And on Wednesday, “Single Parents,” a comedy about single parenting, is more “kids say the darnedest things when those things are scripted” than compelling, and “A Million Little Pieces” is pure mawkishness.
Which brings us to Thursday and to “Murphy Brown.” Weirdly, the show it reminds me of most is “Roseanne” — right down to the “Nasty Woman” shirt and the frustrating predictability of its Trump jokes. This revival picks up significantly when it turns more of its attention to the relationships between its characters, especially in Episodes 2 and 3.
