Patrick Mahomes looks to extend a record-setting start; the Packers hope to rebound in Washington; and Los Angeles teams play each other for the first time since 1994.
People tend to like touchdowns and close games, so this N.F.L. season has truly delivered. The N.F.L. has produced the most touchdowns, and the second most overall points, through two weeks of any season in its history, and according to the league, 25 of the 32 games have been within one score at some point in fourth quarter. For those who like to factor in drama, there have even been nine fourth-quarter comebacks.
This week the Rams are trying to prove they are the team to beat in the N.F.L., while Patrick Mahomes and Ryan Fitzpatrick are trying to show their hot starts are not just a fluke, and Matt Patricia is going up against his old boss, Bill Belichick. A reasonable assumption: Lots of touchdowns, lots of points and more than a few close games.
Here is a look at this week’s schedule, with all picks made against the point spread.
The football world has struggled to quantify just how incredible Chiefs quarterback Patrick Mahomes has been over the season’s first two weeks, but one statistic sums it up best: He set a record for touchdown passes through the first three starts of a career — 10.
The reason that’s especially notable is that Mahomes didn’t throw a single touchdown pass in his first start, which came in the final game of last season. So even after he spotted every quarterback in N.F.L. history a game, he still came out on top.
Mahomes’s 10 touchdowns lead the N.F.L., and the Chiefs (2-0) look unstoppable on offense. They have been so wildly entertaining that little attention has been paid to the fact that their defense has allowed 217 more yards than their offense has gained. Provided Mahomes throws from four to six touchdown passes every week — and no interceptions — a yardage deficit like that can be manageable. But should he regress to the mean even slightly, the jig could be up.
Scoring more than 30 points in each of their first two games was hardly surprising for the Rams (2-0), who had the top-scoring offense in the N.F.L. last season and should only benefit from the addition of receiver Brandin Cooks and another year of development from receiver Cooper Kupp. The question is whether the team’s defense, which added several stars this off-season, is really as good as suggested by the 13 total points it has allowed thus far.
There are plenty of reasons this game is a top-tier matchup, but none of them have to do with the teams’ quality of play so far this season. The Patriots (1-1) have followed up last year’s Super Bowl loss with a narrow victory over Houston and a fairly embarrassing loss to Jacksonville. 
New England’s defense, which has allowed 276 passing yards a game, trying to contain Matthew Stafford, who has averaged 323.5.
The Steelers (0-1-1) are probably not as bad as they have seemed, and the Buccaneers (2-0) should hold off on making Super Bowl plans. But there is no question which team has been having more fun this season.
Ryan Fitzpatrick’s connection with DeSean Jackson has been remarkable — and he has been nearly as productive throwing to Mike Evans. But it is worth remembering that while Fitzpatrick’s back-to-back games of 400 or more passing yards and at least four touchdowns tied an N.F.L. record set by Dan Marino, the record was also matched by the extremely forgettable Billy Volek back in 2004. In Volek’s bid to make it three games in a row with such gaudy statistics, he managed just eight completions and 111 yards.
