Jeffrey Wechsler cooks up a Wednesday puzzle for us.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — Jeffrey Wechsler provides a bit of sustenance to get us through the middle of the week and, if that’s not enough, he also acquaints us with the literal translations of some familiar French food terms. They are not always what they seem.
1A: ASHEville was a gimme for me and probably all of our North Carolina readers. Wordplay also hopes everyone in Virginia and North and South Carolina stays safe in the face of Hurricane Florence.
15A: Fun fact: I’m “Five Foot Two.” I also happen to have EYES of BLUE. Not a day went by in high school when I didn’t hear that song from my teachers.
62D: Remember the EDDA. It has appeared 287 times in the New York Times Crossword, so it pays to know at least the name for these ancient Icelandic works. They are not to be confused with EDDY, which could be a whirlpool; the founder of Christian Science, Mary Baker EDDY; or the 1930s musical star Nelson EDDY.
Mr. Wechsler offers four items that you probably know or at least have heard of, but the clues disguise the entries by giving you their literal meanings when translated from French. This makes things trickier, because who would imagine that the name for those delicious little cakes, PETIT FOURS, means “small ovens”?
Even if you don’t know the complete answer, it’s easy enough to take a stab at it: At 46A, I didn’t know the French word for “leaf,” but I knew that “thousand” was MILLE, and it wasn’t difficult (for me, an unrepentant foodie) to make the leap to MILLE-FEUILLE, the multilayered pastry.
Want a bit more help with the theme? Click on either or both of the other two clues below to see the answers.
It’s always nice to see one’s work published in The New York Times, but I was especially gratified to see this one appear: It had been accepted on Jan. 21, 2017. Well, as they say, good things come to those who wait. For those of you who found 2-Down to be difficult, please note that the event mentioned in the clue was less than a month in the past when the puzzle was accepted.
More recently, I noticed the same thing sometimes occurs in the names of French food items, and the presence of the inimitable Julia Child on American television offered a revealer that would lead to such theme entries. In devising the grid, I was fortunate with the letter length of the selected entries; they allowed me to use a progression of terms that became, to a degree, relatively harder to spell or less familiar as one proceeds down the grid.
And a pun hangs in the air that I can’t resist — the French terms are all theme entries, but not all entrees. Despite that comment, I hope you enjoy the puzzle.
