Nearly a year ago, as countless women began revealing stories of sexual harassment and assault in Hollywood, the actor Terry Crews became a rare male voice in their midst, when he said he, too, had been a target.
Mr. Crews, known for his role on the Fox sitcom “Brooklyn Nine-Nine,” described then the way a “high-level Hollywood executive” had groped him at an industry party in February 2016.
“Jumping back I said ‘what are you doing?’” Mr. Crews wrote in a series of messages on Twitter last October. Ultimately, saying he had feared being ostracized or arrested himself if he reacted violently, he “let it go,” he wrote.
“And I understand why many women who this happens to let it go,” he added.
Mr. Crews, a former N.F.L. player, eventually named the executive as Adam Venit, who was the head of the motion picture department at William Morris Endeavor, a talent agency. Mr. Venit resigned in the first week of September; after an internal investigation begun by W.M.E. last year, Mr. Venit had been demoted and suspended without pay.
Like many of the stories that have emerged in the #MeToo movement, Mr. Crews’s revelations set off a series of legal and professional shock waves throughout the entertainment industry.
“Venit will be retiring from W.M.E. and the agency will institute a new, landmark policy to address workplace conduct of this nature,” said a statement from Mr. Crews’s lawyer, Bryan Sullivan, on Sept. 6 regarding the settlement.
Representatives from W.M.E. declined to comment on the letter on Monday and did not immediately respond to a request for information about the terms of the settlement. The agency previously said that it initiated an investigation after it was made aware of the 2016 incident in October.
In the letter he sent to Mr. Crews, Mr. Venit said that its intent was to “start a dialogue,” to “have us both heal,” and to “move forward.” Mr. Venit added that he was “working on” himself and asked for Mr. Crews’s forgiveness.
Mr. Venit “had no help or input from anyone” in writing the letter months ago, Shawn Holley, a lawyer for Mr. Venit, wrote in an email on Monday.
Mr. Crews has spoken extensively about the encounter with Mr. Venit since he first revealed the man’s name last November. In an interview on ABC’s “Good Morning America” in November, Mr. Crews said that Mr. Venit had been staring at him at a party and making tongue movements, then came over and squeezed his genitals.
Mr. Crews, who said he had post-traumatic stress disorder after hearing the allegations against Harvey Weinstein in 2017, has lent a prominent male voice to the #MeToo movement. In June, he spoke before the Senate Judiciary Committee during a hearing on the fulfillment of a bill of rights for sexual assault survivors.
