The two-bedroom apartment has been home to several well-known fashion designers, including Yves Saint Laurent and Tomas Maier.
A stylish aerie with a long lineage of prominent fashion-designer occupants is back on the market at the Pierre Hotel.
The price for this unit, No. 3804, in the northwest corner of the hotel’s tower, at Fifth Avenue and 61st Street, is $10 million, according to John Burger of Brown Harris Stevens, the listing broker. Monthly maintenance is $10,411.
The co-op apartment was once home to the designer Yves Saint Laurent and his longtime partner Pierre Bergé, who was a founder of the Yves Saint Laurent fashion house. Mr. Bergé purchased it in the 1970s, then sold it for $7.5 million in 2007 to Giancarlo Giammetti, who was a partner of the Valentino fashion designer Valentino Garavani.
The current owner, the German-born designer Tomas Maier, who has his own fashion line, acquired the apartment in 2012 for $8 million, and used it as a pied-à-terre with Andrew Preston, his husband and business partner.
While the unit may be on the small side by Manhattan luxury standards — just under 2,000 square feet with two bedrooms, two baths and a kitchenette — it offers outsize views of Central Park and the Midtown skyline from its 38th-floor perch.
The apartment retains some original architectural features, like the 11-foot ceilings and large casement windows. Much of the space, though, was transformed by the architect Peter Marino after Mr. Giammetti’s purchase a decade ago. Silver leaf finishes adorn the walls of the living room and dining area; antique mirrors and ebony wood panels line the foyer; and custom lighting and built-ins were added throughout. The dark oak floors are in a Parquet de Versailles pattern.
A bedroom currently being used as a library is connected by hidden pocket doors to the 31-by-15-foot great room.
The unit is entered through the foyer, which opens onto a central gallery that leads to most of the rooms.
At one side of the apartment is a 31-by-15-foot great room, with park-facing living and dining areas that are decorated in contemporary furnishings and artwork. Just beyond that space, separated by hidden pocket doors, is a bedroom currently being used as a library. It contains an en suite marble bath with a soaking tub, a dressing area and oak shelves and paneling. The bathroom can also be entered through the foyer.
At the other side of the apartment, the large master suite features a marble bath and a dressing room, along with large windows overlooking the park. The suite has two entrances: one off the main gallery and another through a hidden doorway in the great room.
The great room has living and dining areas that face Central Park.
Mr. Maier’s pied-à-terre at the Pierre could be combined with an adjacent one-bedroom, one-bath apartment, No. 3801, now on the market for $1.895 million, Mr. Burger said.
The smaller unit, also with expansive park views, is being sold by Madison Cox, a garden designer and widower of Mr. Bergé, whom he married months before Mr. Bergé’s death in 2017. Mr. Bergé had owned both this unit and No. 3804, Mr. Burger said, but held onto the smaller apartment.