Christine Blasey Ford reopened discussions on Thursday to appear before the Senate Judiciary Committee next week to discuss her accusation that the Supreme Court nominee, Judge Brett Kavanaugh, had sexually assaulted her. He has denied the allegation.
She ruled out Monday, the day on which Senate Republicans have scheduled a hearing, as a possibility, but she appeared to back off from her earlier request that an F.B.I. investigation precede her testimony.
• Sticking points: At issue is whether other witnesses will be subpoenaed, whether Dr. Blasey or Judge Kavanaugh will testify first, and who will do the questioning. Both Democrats and Republicans agree that steps should be taken to ensure the security of Dr. Blasey, who has received death threats.
• Dianne Feinstein: Angered by the treatment of Anita Hill in 1991, Ms. Feinstein won a Senate seat in California the next year. She now faces withering criticism over her handling of accusations against Judge Kavanaugh, which she knew about for weeks.
A year after Hurricane Maria hit the island, a team of Times journalists visited Punta Santiago, near where the storm made landfall, and documented the damage that remains in more than 150 homes.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency has devoted billions of dollars to emergency repairs, but in house after house, it looks as if the hurricane just hit.
• Creativity from chaos: On a grim anniversary, artists in Puerto Rico and those attached to the island talk about how the devastation and its aftermath influenced their work.
Our reporter made a rare trip on a U.S. Navy surveillance flight over the South China Sea, which pointed out how profoundly China has reshaped the security picture across the region.
The plane — flying in internationally recognized airspace, but near an island that Beijing has filled out and turned into a military base — was challenged by the Chinese for violating what they say is sovereign territory. Roughly one-third of global maritime trade flows through the sea.
The country will again be able to certify on its own that its athletes are not using performance-enhancing drugs, after a vote by the World Anti-Doping Agency on Thursday.
The decision came despite a series of independent investigations that found Russia had orchestrated a vast doping scheme that tainted the Olympics and other major sports events. The conspiracy led the International Olympic Committee to ban Russia from this year’s Winter Olympics in Pyeongchang, South Korea.
• What’s next: The vote clears Russia to start hosting international sports events and paves the way for Russian athletes to begin competing under their own flag.
A 26-year-old woman fatally shot three co-workers at a Rite Aid distribution center in the city of Aberdeen on Thursday, the authorities said. She also wounded three others before killing herself.
It was at least the third shooting at a workplace in the U.S. in less than 24 hours.
A look at how the economic collapse exposed profound problems underlying the American dream.
• “Made in Italy” conjures images of highly skilled artisans. But Italian garment labels, facing global competition, are using thousands of low-paid home workers without contracts or insurance.
Thread used by home workers for some of the spring fashion collections.
• At Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center in Manhattan, doctors and other staff members objected to a for-profit, artificial intelligence venture that could be lucrative for a few leading researchers and board members.
• CBS forced out its chairman and chief executive, Leslie Moonves, after sexual assault claims. But he might still collect a $120 million severance payment, our columnist writes.
• U.S. stocks were up on Thursday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets today.
• Starting today, all three major credit reporting bureaus will let consumers freeze their credit files for free. Here’s why you should consider it.
• Save money by learning proper home maintenance.
• Recipe of the day: Embrace fall with maple pecan monkey bread.
In New Zealand, the Maori language is experiencing a revival. It’s one of seven stories that inspired us.
Did you keep up with this week’s news? Test yourself.
Carson Wentz returns for the Super Bowl champion Philadelphia Eagles. We have live coverage of N.F.L. Week 3 here.
The Boston Red Sox clinched a spot in the postseason on Thursday. Here’s where the other teams stand.
At the movies, we review “Colette,” a biopic of the French writer starring Keira Knightley, and “Fahrenheit 11/9,” the director Michael Moore’s documentary about President Trump. You can find all of this week’s film reviews here.
On TV, Candice Bergen and “Murphy Brown” return next week after a 20-year hiatus. We spoke to Ms. Bergen and the series’ creator, Diane English, about the revival.
We also review “Maniac,” the new dystopian Netflix family-therapy dramedy with Emma Stone and Jonah Hill.
One of our writers takes you behind the scenes at the Metropolitan Opera as hundreds of people run around before the opening of the season on Monday.
Lastly, we suggest seven new books and, if you’re in New York City, a slate of cultural events.
 Then a stray dog wandered in. Read this week’s Modern Love column.
James Corden had fun with a report that President Trump suggested that officials in Spain build a wall across the Sahara to stem immigration.
— Dave Limp, a senior vice president at Amazon, introducing several devices that work with the Alexa voice assistant.
Prince — whose posthumous album is being released today — repeatedly shook up the music industry with his infectious, genre-bending songs and daring personality.
But there’s a less colorful way in which he helped change music: the black-and-white “Parental Advisory” labels on albums containing explicit lyrics.
The song “Darling Nikki” appeared on his 1984 album, “Purple Rain,” and describes a girl pleasuring herself. When Tipper Gore, the wife of Al Gore, then a senator, heard the song while listening to the album with her 11-year-old daughter, she began a fight against explicit album lyrics.
Ms. Gore and several other women in Washington formed the Parents Music Resource Center, urging the music industry and Congress to create a rating system for songs based on their content.
In the end, record labels agreed to add “Parental Advisory” stickers to albums, a compromise that became infamous enough to match the neon electric swagger of the man who inspired them.
Alisha Haridasani Gupta wrote today’s Back Story.
