NORTON, Mass. — The Dell Technologies Championship was supposed to serve as a teaser for the news conference on Tuesday in which three of the remaining four United States Ryder Cup picks will be announced. But on a muggy Monday, Bryson DeChambeau, Tiger Woods, Phil Mickelson and Tony Finau squeezed all but the last note of drama out of the announcement from Jim Furyk, the United States captain.
DeChambeau, the highest-ranking American in the Ryder Cup standings not to qualify on points, played the final 36 holes at T.P.C. Boston in 12 under par, including a four-under 67 in the final round, for his second victory since the first eight team members were finalized last month. DeChambeau, 24, who has won three PGA Tour events since June, is the second player to win the first two playoff events, after the former world No. 1 Vijay Singh.
DeChambeau scored a four-stroke victory over Finau at The Northern Trust last week and prevailed here by two shots over Justin Rose of England. Finau ended up four shots back, in a group of three tied for fourth, after closing with a 68 to secure his 10th top-10 showing of the season.
It was Mickelson who claimed the lowest score of the day, posting nine birdies in his round of 63 to finish tied for 12th at 10-under 274, in his bid to secure a spot in his 12th Ryder Cup. Mickelson, 48, had a sizzling start this season with five top-10 finishes, including a World Golf Championships title, in his first eight events. But he has cracked the top 10 only once since.
Mickelson, who was 10th in the Ryder Cup standings, directly behind DeChambeau, described the timing of his season-low round as “so fortunate,” though he was quick to add a little last-minute stumping for himself. He pointed to his putting this season, in which he ranks No. 2 on the tour behind Jason Day, an Australian who is not eligible for the Ryder Cup, the biennial event between the United States and Europe.
Mickelson did not have to mention that he is essentially a don of the Ryder Cup after playing an instrumental role in forming the American task force that instituted changes that helped deliver a victory to the United States in 2014 in Minnesota. It is hard to imagine a Ryder Cup taking place without him — or without Woods, who already had a non-playing spot on the team sewn up and was 11th in the final point standings.
Woods, 42, volunteered for a second stint as a Ryder Cup assistant captain after serving in the same capacity in 2014, when his injured back kept him from playing. By all accounts, he aced his supporting role, which included making peanut butter sandwiches and delivering pep talks to the players in his pod.
But there is only so much Woods can do to affect the outcome as a nonparticipant, which is why he told Furyk early this year that he hoped to play this time around.
Woods helped his cause considerably with five top-10 finishes, including a tie for sixth at the British Open and a runner-up showing at the P.G.A. Championship. And on his front nine Monday, Woods appeared as though he was still auditioning for Furyk. After starting the day seven strokes behind the 54-hole leader, Abraham Ancer, and six behind DeChambeau, Woods climbed to within three strokes of the lead, at 10 under, with his third birdie of the round.
He fell back with a bogey and a double bogey down the stretch to post an even-par 71, which left him tied for 24th. In the third round Woods had been paired with DeChambeau, who shot a 63 and in the process offered Furyk a preview of a possible foursome or four-ball pairing for the Ryder Cup, which will take place outside Paris this month.
DeChambeau will be a Ryder Cup rookie but, technically, it will be his second appearance at a Ryder Cup. He paid his own way to Minnesota for the 2016 event at Hazeltine, which took place shortly after DeChambeau had secured his PGA Tour playing privileges with a strong showing on the Web.com Tour.
He said Monday that he had traveled to the team event so he would know what to expect in the future. That self-belief, along with an invitation to the team room, helped nurture the dream that reached full flower this year.
