Ever since the days when Angelenos sold tamales out of horse-drawn carts, street food has been a fixture in this city.
It has also been illegal, even as taco carts and fruit stands with their familiar rainbow umbrellas have been mainstays on street corners. Vendors — mostly immigrants, many undocumented — have faced fines, misdemeanor criminal charges and, increasingly in the Trump era, the threat of deportation.
For years, activists have pushed to legalize street vending in Los Angeles, and city officials were close to doing so. But this week Gov. Jerry Brown beat them to it, signing a law that decriminalized street vendors across California.
Street vending here has always been bound up with issues of race and class, as well as the nature of the urban landscape of Los Angeles — its sprawl, the centrality of the automobile and debates about how public spaces are used.
And in the last two years, the administration’s crackdown on immigration gave new urgency to the push to legalize street sellers. Activists here made the argument that protecting immigrant street vendors was an important step for the city in pushing back against the president’s agenda.
Rudy Espinoza, an activist who has worked for years to legalize street vending in Los Angeles, had been involved in promoting economic development in immigrant communities when he learned about the plight of street vendors. “They told us, ‘Hey, we are getting criminalized out here,’” he recalled.
One case last year that galvanized activists was in Rancho Cucamonga, where a woman was arrested for selling corn on the cob and detained by immigration authorities.
Jonathan Gold, the revered Los Angeles Times food critic, was an enthusiastic evangelist for street food, vibrant sidewalks and raising awareness about the plight of street vendors.
Can a concert hall dream?
The Los Angeles Philharmonic will find out a week from today, for its centennial, when the Turkish artist Refik Anadol transforms the orchestra’s Walt Disney Concert Hall into a swirling, phantasmagorical collage of digitized artifacts from the Philharmonic’s own history.
Mr. Anadol, a data artist, said he likes to imagine the Frank Gehry-designed building as an enormous artificial intelligence that recalls the orchestra’s past and slips into reverie about its future.
