PHILADELPHIA — “You guys are being a little weird,” Kurt Vile said to his daughters Awilda, 8, and Delphine, who turns 6 on Saturday. Awilda climbed onto Mr. Vile’s shoulders in the sun room of the family’s house, which prompted Delphine to ask him to lift her by the arms and flip her over. And they were talking about butts.
Mr. Vile; his wife, Suzanne Lang; and their two home-schooled girls live in a fieldstone Georgian Revival house, smartly decorated with midcentury modern furniture, in the Mt. Airy section of this city, bordering the forestlike 1,800-acre Wissahickon Valley Park.
“I wasn’t here. Where was the tick?” asked Mr. Vile, who was wearing a Waylon Jennings T-shirt, jeans and purple sneakers.
Mr. Vile’s family, like his songs, is comfortably offbeat. This 38-year-old singer, guitarist and songwriter, who looks and seems younger, is the nearest thing rock music has these days to a consensus. He blends well with artists a generation ahead of him (he’s toured with Dinosaur Jr. and Flaming Lips) and two generations ahead. (He’s opened for Neil Young and John Prine, and performed with Cyndi Lauper and John Cale.) He’s recorded with the goth ballad singer Hope Sandoval, the alt-country group the Sadies and the elite Saharan blues band Tinariwen.
Mr. Vile isn’t a household name. He’s more like weird underground rock’s emissary to the mainstream. Lorde put his “Society Is My Friend” on a Spotify playlist of her favorite songs. The country star Keith Urban expressed amazement at Mr. Vile’s 2015 breakout hit, “Pretty Pimpin,” saying, “It sounds like pure stream of consciousness.” In the last few years, at major music festivals, Kurt Vile — improbably, it’s his real name — has been as constant a presence as flower crowns and vaping.
Mr. Vile’s new album, “Bottle It In,” is due Oct. 12. His most consistent to date, it sharpens and deepens his sound. He writes ramshackle songs with loping tempos, and hangs behind the beat while drawling quizzical lyrics that search for wisdom, epiphanies or comedy in the mundane. His appeal rests not only in versatility and the kind of authenticity that only lengthy guitar solos can establish, but also in inscrutability. His music is personal — the “I” in his songs, he says, is almost always himself — but not revealing, which makes him a trusted figure in an era when, to many people, charisma feels corny, manipulative or striving. 
Mr. Vile doesn’t exactly tell you about himself. He ducks in and out of clauses when he talks, leaving thoughts and insights unfinished, averting his glance behind a parted curtain of hair. He reveals certain details of his life — he thinks he has undiagnosed attention deficit disorder; he has meltdowns when he’s under stress — but doesn’t fully explicate them.
And if Ms. Lang doesn’t answer, Delphine added helpfully, he gets anxious and phones a neighbor.
Ms. Lang, a practitioner of alternative Ayurvedic medicine, who has asymmetrically cropped hair and a wide, steadying smile, was 16 when she met Mr. Vile, then a 14-year-old skateboarder who had trouble paying attention in school. Her sister called him Tigger, after Winnie-the-Pooh’s fidgety friend. “Kurt bounced all over the place, and he was a little nervous, too,” Ms. Lang recalled.
“I’m still a little nervous,” Mr. Vile murmured.
“Aren’t we all?” Ms. Lang said sympathetically.
WHEN MR. VILE and Ms. Lang married in June 2003, he gave guests a homemade CD-R of his music called “Ten Songs.” For years, he recorded his work on home audio equipment and tried to get anyone to notice. With his unkempt hair and plaid shirts, he looks like a grunge bassist, or a roadie, the role he played this year in a “Portlandia” cameo. (Mr. Vile’s best line, which he delivered expertly, described a pressing need to use the bathroom.) But he’s as determined as his manner is indolent.
Mr. Vile’s father, Charlie, drove trains for Philadelphia’s regional transit system and loved bluegrass, especially Doc Watson. When Kurt turned 14, his dad gave him a banjo, which replaced skateboarding as an obsession. Mr. Vile, the third of 10 kids, was a weirdo, he said, “but not too weird, only as weird as awkward teens growing up in the grunge era, trying things out.” He played trumpet in the school jazz band, switched from banjo to guitar, and began studying indie rockers, especially Pavement, Beck, Sonic Youth and Dinosaur Jr.
After high school and a period of uncertainty, Mr. Vile moved to Boston to join Ms. Lang, who had graduated from Dartmouth and enrolled at Emerson College, where she earned an M.F.A. in poetry.
When the couple moved back to Philly, Mr. Vile operated a forklift at a local brewery, and met the singer Adam Granduciel, who had recently moved from Oakland. The pair bonded over their love of Bob Dylan and Mr. Young. For a while, Mr. Granduciel played in Mr. Vile’s band, the Violators, and Mr. Vile played in Mr. Granduciel’s band, the War on Drugs.
He knew the boastful title would annoy people, but he also meant it — Mr. Vile wanted to write hit songs. “Granted, those songs weren’t in the charts,” he said. “I feel like, deep down, everybody wants a real song, with emotion and that familiar classic thing, and I was going for that with …” His voice trailed off into a puff. “I’m, like, losing my speech here. I think I had a stroke,” he said and laughed.
Mr. Vile was fired from the brewery in 2009 for demonstrating too many mixed feelings about his job. Shortly after, he was signed by Matador Records, the label that had released the Sonic Youth and Pavement albums he’d loved. “Bottle It In” is his sixth Matador album, following a collaborative LP with Courtney Barnett.
Putting out rock music on an indie label in 2018 isn’t a surefire way to become a superstar, yet Mr. Vile said he craves a large audience: “I like the idea of getting bigger. I do want more success.” “Pretty Pimpin” went to No. 1 on Billboard’s adult alternative chart, where it sat among Mumford & Sons and Coldplay tracks, and Mr. Vile anticipates releasing several singles from “Bottle It In.” “We’re going to try to pull a Bruce Springsteen, ‘Born in the U.S.A.,’ and just, you know, keep putting out hit singles,” he said, more in earnest than in jest.
The themes of his songs, however, aren’t quite conducive to mass appeal. His lyrics often describe events that defy physics and echo the cosmic musings of ’60s psychedelic rock, which leads people “to label Vile a spaced-out stoner,” as Pitchfork wrote.
In “Wild Imagination,” a revealing song from his 2015 album, “b’lieve i’m goin down,” he describes a hallucinatory image he’s having, and wonders whether others can imagine it, too. Mr. Vile knows he’s got an oddball mind. And while songs are good when they’re enigmatic, interviews are not.
I also, quite unfairly, asked him how I should end this article. In his reply, he said that every day for years, he ate two eggs over easy for breakfast, but now he hates them for breakfast, and eats them only at lunch.
By continuing to confuse me, this answer gave me some clarity. His replies weren’t riddles; they were clues about not believing in certainty. Mr. Vile is a philosopher in search of philosophy, happy to keep looking.