Ori Menashe and Genevieve Gergis, of the restaurants Bestia and Bavel in Los Angeles, talk about their food, their partnership and celebrating the Jewish holidays.
For 364 days of the year, Ori Menashe, the self-taught chef of the Los Angeles restaurants Bestia and Bavel, is obsessed with spices and the flavor they bring to food. But there is one day he lays off the seasoning: the meal before the fast of Yom Kippur.
They celebrate the High Holy Days together, and most of the time Mr. Menashe brings food from his restaurants to one of his sisters’ homes, adding spreads like tzatziki, baba ghanouj and hummus to be served along with their dishes, which may include pumpkin and tomato soup and braised short ribs with pomegranates. But for the meals before and after the fast that marks the Jewish Day of Atonement, they stick to chicken soup, roast chicken with potatoes or a simple beef stew.
For Jews, Yom Kippur is a time to pause and reflect; Mr. Menashe, 37, could use that right now. He and his wife and business partner, Genevieve Gergis, are juggling their two restaurants — where Ms. Gergis, 40, is the pastry chef — as well as the October release of their first cookbook, “Bestia” (Ten Speed Press, 2018), and a 4-year-old daughter, Saffron.
Bavel (pronounced Ba-VEL, the Hebrew word for “Babel”), which opened in April, serves Mr. Menashe’s Israeli and pan-Middle Eastern cooking. The restaurant has the melancholy honor of being the last reviewed by the late critic Jonathan Gold, who raved about dishes like Mr. Menashe’s hummus, colored and spiced with both red North African harissa and green Yemenite zhug (a hot sauce made with fresh herbs), and his braised Wagyu beef tagine with ethereal handmade couscous.
Mr. Menashe was born in Southern California to Israeli parents, who between the two of them had Moroccan, Georgian and Turkish ancestry. When he was 8, his parents sold the two clothing stores they owned and moved back to Israel, where Mr. Menashe lived until he was 21. His father loved to cook and both his parents liked to travel, so he and his three siblings were exposed to good cooking at restaurants throughout Europe.
After finishing his Israeli military service in 2002, Mr. Menashe went with army friends to Argentina, where he did all the cooking. He decided to learn the profession and return to California, where he met Ms. Gergis at the now-shuttered restaurant La Terza in Los Angeles.
The daughter of a Coptic Christian, Egyptian-born scientist and a Catholic, Ukrainian-American social worker, Ms. Gergis was raised in a secular home. She was hostessing at La Terza when she quit her nascent and not very profitable career as a French horn player.
Mr. Menashe left La Terza for Angelini Osteria, where he became sous-chef and then chef de cuisine before leaving to open Bestia in 2012. Ms. Gergis, meanwhile, worked in interior design and furniture sales, baking only at home for pleasure.
When Bestia opened in a warehouse in the Arts District here, Mr. Menashe was the chef and Ms. Gergis the pastry chef. It was the first time the couple had worked together in the kitchen.
The restaurant, which paired Mr. Menashe’s rustic Italian food with local ingredients in a casual California setting, was a success.
The food at Bavel — which is also located in a warehouse, with an open kitchen with long strands of ivies tumbling down from the ceiling — is more personal to Mr. Menashe and more directly connected to his upbringing.
Pomegranates, which are mentioned in Deuteronomy, are a sign of plenty throughout the High Holy Days. For dessert, Ms. Gergis makes a moist prune-and-apple cake that is flavored with cardamom and cinnamon, a biblical spice; that, too, can be made ahead.
This is the food, Mr. Menashe said, that he has always wanted to cook.
