WILMINGTON, Del. — Senator Tom Carper is 13 for 13 in statewide races here, a record of success that dates to his election as state treasurer in 1976. And Mr. Carper’s formula for victory has largely remained constant: stay true to a centrist brand of politics that appeals to Delaware’s mix of rural voters and suburbanites while retaining a ubiquitous presence at churches, firehouse fund-raisers and birthday parties to which he may or may not have been invited.
After sweating his way through a steamy Labor Day parade in downtown Wilmington on Monday, Mr. Carper took even longer to walk back to his Town & Country minivan because he was so eager to discuss his efforts to clean up the city’s waterfront when he was governor of this lightly populated “state of neighbors.” And because he stopped to greet every passer-by, even startling one young couple with an offer to carry their groceries into their apartment.
But as Mr. Carper seeks the Democratic nomination on Thursday for what would be his fourth Senate term, his well-honed strategy is being tested by Kerri Evelyn Harris, a political newcomer whose candidacy reflects the same urgent demands of other progressives in the Trump era. As with many of the generational, racial and ideological challenges rippling through her party, Ms. Harris’s bid is premised on the idea that a platform of pork-barrel projects, congeniality and constituent services is no longer sufficient to the moment.
An Air Force veteran, Ms. Harris, 38, is running to Mr. Carper’s left, arguing that his penchant for conciliation and his willingness to accommodate Delaware’s financial service and pharmaceutical industries is wildly out of step with the expectations of the restive left.
She has inspiration from other insurgent women who have upended the Democratic establishment, like Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez in New York and Ayanna Pressley, who jolted the Massachusetts political world on Tuesday by upsetting a 10-term incumbent in the House. Like them, Ms. Harris is carrying a populist message and a palpable impatience with the status quo.
“There’s been a blurring of lines between parties, and it’s time to bring the Democratic Party back to people,” she said after the parade and before plunging into a park full of union workers featuring a truck offering free beer.
Mr. Carper, 71, has sought to fend off Ms. Harris’s challenge by sharpening his rhetoric against Mr. Trump. And he has tacked leftward on a handful of issues, conceding that there’s “no way in hell” he would have voted Brett M. Kavanaugh into a circuit court judgeship if he had known then what he does today about the Supreme Court nominee.
Yet even as Mr. Carper tries to accommodate his party base, he and other moderate Democrats here are plainly uneasy about the implications of Ms. Harris’s candidacy. They fret out loud that if such primary threats grow routine in both parties, the demands for ideological purity will only worsen the gridlock in Washington.
“What we have now are a lot of forces from outside the state who don’t think there’s room for a centrist anymore,” said Mr. Carper, a former naval aviator who wore his old flight suit to the parade in honor of his late Republican colleague, John McCain.
But Delaware was ahead of the curve nationally in the realignment of the suburbs from Republican to Democrat, and the state has not elected a Republican to Congress for a decade. Now a Democratic stronghold, it is seeing the sort of internecine competition that is often inevitable in one-party states.
“This is relatively new to us and it means that a younger generation of candidates view themselves as not being willing to work their way up through elections and they want to go straight for primarying our most senior elected official,” said Senator Chris Coons, who took Mr. Biden’s seat after serving on the county council.
But she is most eager to talk about her class identity, recalling her time in the military as well as her experience since then frying chicken in a gas station and working as an auto mechanic.
“I’m a working-class person figuring out how to make it in this economy like the rest of us,” she said, arguing that the Senate needs more members with such blue-collar credentials.
She is running on universal health care, a $15 minimum wage and what she calls a “Wall Street speculation tax,” which is not often heard in a state where the insignia for Chase Bank is stripped across one of Wilmington’s largest buildings.
But Ms. Harris’s candidacy has been obscured nationally by some other left-wing candidates and she has only raised about $140,000. Mr. Carper has more than $1 million on hand.
Her broader challenge, however, is Delaware’s demographics. The state is only 23 percent black and, unlike New York and Boston, it has no population center full of young, progressive millennials. Interviews with a range of voters marching in, and taking in, the Labor Day parade made clear that some voters were not fully aware of Ms. Harris.
For his part, Mr. Carper suggests this will be his last term — he offers the Rolling Stones lyrics “This may be the last time” — and brushes off ferocious attacks from left-wing websites, such as The Intercept. “I wear it with honor,” he said.
He is not, he said, blind to the challenge. He recalled sharing an Amtrak row with Mr. Castle, who was memorably upset by Christine O’Donnell (“I’m not a witch”) in the 2010 Republican Senate primary here.
Unlike Mr. Castle, and the man he beat in 2000 to claim his seat — the 79-year-old William Roth, who would only occasionally return to the state to campaign with his St. Bernard — Mr. Carper is working aggressively to stay in office. And he is cognizant of how Mr. Trump has inflamed the Democratic Party.
When it comes to movement, he is an authority. Returning to his parking spot, Mr. Carper noted he had put 485,000 miles on his 2001 minivan.