Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo’s former top lieutenant approved an inflammatory flier that suggested the governor’s Democratic rival, Cynthia Nixon, was anti-Semitic, the campaign said on Wednesday. And it was another former aide to the governor who crafted the mailer’s language, according to an email obtained by The New York Times.
Lawrence S. Schwartz, the former secretary to the governor, inadvertently signed off on the flier after its language was drafted by David Lobl, a former special assistant to the governor who was volunteering with the re-election effort, the campaign said. Mr. Lobl suggested the language for the mailer in an email to two campaign aides, who helped create the flier.
The correspondence, dated Sept. 1, shows Mr. Lobl outlining text that was later replicated almost verbatim on the back side of the mailer, which was sent to 7,000 households shortly before Rosh Hashana and days before Thursday’s primary.
CN has been silent on anti-Semetisim,” misspelling anti-Semitism.
Mr. Lobl, who acted as a liaison to the Jewish community when he worked for Mr. Cuomo, declined to comment.
It is common for such liaisons to draft talking points and other material for campaigns. In the emails, Mr. Lobl went on to suggest that the campaign mailing include a photograph of the governor with President Reuven Rivlin of Israel, which appeared on the front side of the flier. The email also includes mentions of the governor’s accomplishments on Jewish causes, which were also detailed on the flier.
In a statement, Lis Smith, a spokeswoman for Mr. Cuomo’s campaign, confirmed that Mr. Lobl had written the initial email that inspired the mailer, and that Mr. Schwartz, who was volunteering on the governor’s campaign, had approved it. But she said Mr. Schwartz had not noticed the false claims on the reverse side.
In a phone interview on Wednesday night, Mr. Schwartz said that he was very upset by the mailers, noting that he is Jewish.
Ms. Nixon is not Jewish, but she is raising two of her children in the Jewish faith. The claims in the flier were untrue, including the reference to the BDS movement, which seeks to punish Israel with boycotts, divestment and sanctions.
Mr. Cuomo, a Democrat seeking a third term, has denied any knowledge of the creation of the flier, calling it a “mistake,” and not indicative of his campaign.
The Nixon campaign, noting Mr. Cuomo’s close ties to Mr. Schwartz, questioned how the governor could not have been aware of the mailer.
“The question now remains: What did the governor know about this sleazy smear attack, and why hasn’t he held anyone accountable for it?” Rebecca Katz, a senior campaign adviser, said in a statement.