The first three films in the “Purge” series were (A) crude but effective exploitation flicks with a sociological veneer or (B) eerily prescient forecasts of the rise of white nationalism and the degeneration of American politics.
The answer is A, entirely, and also B to a greater extent than their writer and director, James DeMonaco, has been given credit for. His vision of a retro-religious party gaining power behind the slogan “a nation reborn” and instituting an annual 12-hour free for all called the Purge — as a relief valve, and to cull the underclass — didn’t exactly come true in the 2016 election. But it didn’t exactly not come true.
Like a lot of people in Hollywood, though, Mr. DeMonaco had a failure of imagination when it really counted. In “Election Year,” released in July 2016, a liberal female presidential candidate escapes assassination in the Purge and wins the election. A few months later, real life wrote a different ending. Mr. DeMonaco hadn’t had the courage of his dystopian convictions.
Rather than following up on “Election Year” and further exploring the political and cultural dimensions of its premise, the TV show is set in an indeterminate earlier period that appears to be about 20 years into the reign of the New Founding Fathers of America. And in the first three episodes, following the dictates of basic cable, it dials back both the social commentary and the splatter-happy action and violence from their cinematic levels.
From that familiar starting point, though, Mr. DeMonaco and his colleagues have had to recalibrate the structure, to stretch his single-night premise (assuming that the TV show conforms to it) over 10 episodes. Where the films were blunt, compact delivery systems for standard action-horror situations — a family defending its home, a band of strangers joining to survive a journey — TV has different requirements.
So now there are back stories, which means frequent flashbacks, and subplots that are elaborated as separate little morality tales. An executive (Amanda Warren) and her team have to ride out the night at the office to close a big deal. An anti-Purge couple (Colin Woodell and Hannah Anderson) attend a pro-Purge party. An ex-Marine (Gabriel Chavarria) searches for his sister (Jessica Garza), who’s joined a quasi-religious sacrificial cult.
Sticking close to role models like John Carpenter and Walter Hill in the “Purge” films, Mr. DeMonaco achieved a balance of cleverness and over-the-top violence in sub-two-hour packages. It’s a tougher trick to pull off over the course of a TV series — AMC’s “Preacher” gets it right, but there aren’t many other examples. (The most critically lauded current presentation of similar material in series form, “The Handmaid’s Tale,” succeeds by dint of extreme seriousness.) It remains to be seen whether Mr. DeMonaco and the series’ other producers have more up their sleeves.