The next great Los Angeles Laker is always en route.
At least it has seemed that way since June 1975, when the Lakers capitalized on Kareem Abdul-Jabbar’s longing for a more multicultural city than Milwaukee and beat out the Knicks to acquire the N.B.A.’s eventual all-time leading scorer in a seismic trade. The first 35 seasons after Abdul-Jabbar’s arrival featured a steady stream of stars and, most notably, 10 championship banners.
Yet I suspect even the most die-hard denizens of Lakerland were starting to worry that the magic was gone. Their beloved team entered N.B.A. free agency in July having missed out on the playoffs for a franchise-record five consecutive seasons. Worse yet, L.A. had been outright shunned in recent summers by the league’s top free agents.
The Lakers’ struggles to connect with the biggest names in the game, especially in the wake of Kobe Bryant’s retirement in April 2016, are a big reason the club’s controlling owner, Jeanie Buss, appointed Magic Johnson as president of basketball operations without warning in February 2017.
Then, at 5:05 p.m. California time on July 1, it happened: LeBron James announced via his agent Rich Paul’s Twitter feed that he had decided to leave his home-state Cleveland Cavaliers — for the second time — to sign the four-year contract Buss and Johnson offered him.
Just like that, the Lakers became the Lakers again.
As I explain in this On Pro Basketball column, James’s debut campaign with the Lakers is perhaps the most difficult regular season he has faced since his second season in the N.B.A. with the Cavaliers, way back in 2004-05.
That was arguably the last time one of James’s teams, in the eyes of preseason prognosticators, was seen as a better bet to miss the playoffs entirely rather than to win the N.B.A. championship.
On a momentous Monday across the league, with teams staging a flurry of news conferences in advance of N.B.A. training camps starting Tuesday, James made his first public appearance in a Lakers uniform. He took nearly 15 minutes of questions about the challenges ahead with his new team, looking and sounding rather serious.
James’s demeanor would suggest he already recognizes how much work and meshing it will take for this group — without a clearly established second superstar — to get anywhere near the Western Conference elite as currently constituted.
“We got a long way to go to get to Golden State,” James told reporters, referring to the two-time defending champion Warriors.
The actor Jimmy Bennett appeared on an Italian TV show, where the host, Massimo Giletti, questioned the idea of how a man could be raped by a woman.Credit...
Henry Wessel was a New Jersey native, but California enthralled him from the moment he arrived in Los Angeles in 1969.
That light became a fixture of many of his photographs, which offer black-and-white glimpses of vernacular scenes in the American West. One of his most well-known images, “Santa Barbara, Calif., 1977,” draws the viewer in with the axial light of the early morning sun.
Mr. Wessel was never without his Leica and became a cornerstone of the photography program at the San Francisco Art Institute. He died last week at his home in Point Richmond at 76.
See his photographs and read his full obituary here.
