Sunday Review|Where Does Rabbi Voice Come From?
Where Does Rabbi Voice Come From?
“Seinfeld” parodied it. It’s all over Woody Allen. But no one quite knows how the singsong lilt of the Jewish clergy got its start.
Why do rabbis talk like that?
Where does that voice come from? Last spring, while sitting through my son’s bar mitzvah, I suddenly wanted to know. If I could find the source of that voice, I believed, I might understand something about my tradition. I might understand how it is that, though much of the religious service leaves me cold, though the sermons don’t often stir me, I still find myself in the pew. Is it the prayers that keep bringing me back, the stories, or is it something about the voice itself?
In “The Right Stuff,” Tom Wolfe makes the case that nearly every pilot in America, whether knowing it or not, is imitating Chuck Yeager, the test pilot who broke the speed of sound. The cool of that voice, twangy and calm amid catastrophe — “We’ve got a little ol’ red light up here on the control panel that’s tryin’ to tell us that the landin’ gears’re not … uh … lockin’ into position when we lower ‘em. …” — was imitated by pilots who imitated other pilots until it turned up on the P.A. of your turbulence-tossed flight to LAX.
That’s culture: people copying people they don’t even know they’re copying. Is this what happened with the voice?
There’s not been much written about the voice. Possibly because it’s vague. Researching it is like researching the history of a smell. Important but insubstantial, hard to document. There are a few articles and some work done by linguists, but a general history remains elusive; the voice is everywhere and nowhere. If something can’t be measured, it’s as if it does not exist.
Each expert offered a slightly different explanation, but there was overlap, agreement. A pattern emerged. As far as I can tell, there are three basic explanations. The voice is the intricate product of a multipronged historical process.
According to this explanation, the voice is a side effect of a life of intense religious study. Because neither the Torah nor the Talmud is punctuated, students learn to add intonation with vocal emphasis. Which is why so many rabbis end sentences on a rise.
It’s a literary style that created a certain kind of mind — made by the people, it remade the people in turn, organized their thinking around endless probing.
The cadence comes from the dialect of the shtetl and the Pale of Settlement, where Jews developed an especially expressive language to describe especially terrible circumstances. In New York, Yiddish-isms mixed with neighborhood lingo, creating a patois. Some of those phrases made it into the American lexicon, where they live forever.
The people are gone, but their words remain: klutz, kvel, mensch. And it was not just the words but the structure of the sentences, which were inverted, tuned for pontificating. Scholars call it the “Yoda effect” — the wizened Muppet was an old rebbe, teaching the ancient wisdom.
Scholars call it the “Yoda effect” — the wizened Muppet was an old rebbe, teaching the ancient wisdom.
The voice originated from the Talmud and Yiddish, but spread via imitation — many rabbis imitating some long ago Rabbi Chuck Yeager. That’s why it thrives among even the most assimilated clergy members. For many people who’ve forgotten the rituals, the voice, along with bagels and lox, Streisand and Koufax, is what remains of the old ways, a comforting item in the storehouse of cultural Judaism. Why do even Reform rabbis talk like that? Because it makes them seem Jewish and because it’s what their congregants want.
Knowing the origin of the voice, or thinking I do, has changed the way I experience those Friday nights at synagogue. I now understand why, though the prayers and rituals fail to touch me, I am still moved. It’s not the words, but the voice. Or, as my father would say, “Not the what, but the how.” It’s about text and subtext. The text of the Rosh Hashana sermon changes each year. Maybe it’s climate change, maybe it’s Israel — but the subtext, which is a tone, is constant.
Embedded in that tone is the history of a particular branch of the Hebrews, the Expulsion and the endless walk out of Zion, forays in Germany and Poland, shtetls and schools, the jewel like cities of the East, the mystics and false messiahs, the misery, hatred and pogroms, the wars, harbors and ships, grandparents who laid their lives across the water so that we could walk into Brooklyn and Cleveland and Chicago, then the big shul in the suburbs, where the voice is all that remains.
