Struggling to catch up on the news with Brett Kavanaugh and the F.B.I. investigation? Here’s the latest guide to Times coverage.
Uncertainty continues to hover over President Trump’s nomination of Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court as the F.B.I. carries out a renewed background check into sexual assault allegations against the judge.
Mr. Trump ordered that inquiry on Friday after demands from key Senate Republicans. The Senate Judiciary Committee voted to advance the nomination to the full Senate, but the F.B.I.’s background check will delay a confirmation vote by as much as one week. Questions emerged about the inquiry’s scope and who the F.B.I. will interview.
A day earlier, the committee — and the nation — heard emotional and contradicting accounts from the judge and Christine Blasey Ford, one of the women who have accused him of sexually assaulting them decades ago. Judge Kavanaugh, who adamantly denied the claims, at times crafted responses that were misleading, disputed or off point, our fact-check found.
Here’s a guide to the latest coverage from The Times.
Mr. Trump’s announcement came after Senator Jeff Flake, a crucial swing vote, said he would not support Judge Kavanaugh’s final confirmation until the F.B.I. investigated the accusations.
Hours earlier, after Mr. Flake indicated that he would vote yes on confirmation, two women blocked an elevator door and demanded his attention, castigating him for his decision and sharing that they had been sexually assaulted.
As Mr. Flake wavered, his Republican colleagues on the Judiciary Committee implored him to stick with his earlier decision. But Mr. Flake was not persuaded.
Here’s a look into the 24 hours that led Mr. Flake to call for a deeper look into the accusations.
The F.B.I. investigation will be limited, relying on voluntary interviews and document production. Agents can look into the allegations by interviewing witnesses Dr. Blasey says were present at the party, scrutinizing Judge Kavanaugh’s calendars from 1982 and searching for records that could corroborate the accusers’ stories.
Not included, however, on the F.B.I.’s list of witnesses are former classmates of Judge Kavanaugh’s who have contradicted his congressional testimony about drinking and partying as a student.
Here are three inconsistencies between Dr. Blasey’s and Judge Kavanaugh’s testimonies that the F.B.I. could address.
“I believed he was going to rape me,” Dr. Blasey said on Thursday in her harrowing account before the committee.
“This is a circus,” the judge said, denying her allegations.
Dr. Blasey, a university professor and research psychologist, described the terror she felt one summer day more than 30 years ago when, she said, a drunken teenage Judge Kavanaugh pinned her on a bed, tried to rip her clothes off and clapped his hand over her mouth as she pleaded for help.
Appearing before the same committee later in the day, Judge Kavanaugh delivered a blistering defense, denouncing a partisan “frenzy” bent on destroying his nomination.
The contrast was stark. While Dr. Blasey was deferential, even solicitous, Judge Kavanaugh was bristling with outrage and grievance. The accounts left no room for compromise: Senators were left to choose which one they believed.
Americans were transfixed. Online, donations poured in to a fund-raising campaign set up on behalf of Dr. Blasey after she mentioned it in the hearing. And, on television, C-Span became an unlikely town square for everyday people to share their deeply personal reactions to the unfolding drama.
We heard from dozens of readers who identified themselves as trauma victims and said they struggled with their own memories as Dr. Blasey shared her story.
For many conservatives, especially white men, Judge Kavanaugh’s fury joined a rallying cry led by Mr. Trump against a liberal order.
Mr. Trump himself praised Judge Kavanaugh, attacked Democrats and urged the Senate to vote.
Watch a recap of Thursday’s hearing here.
Dr. Blasey was the first to accuse Judge Kavanaugh, but she was not alone. Two other women have come forward publicly in recent days with allegations against him, while an additional anonymous accusation surfaced on Wednesday.
At the hearing, Dr. Blasey came across as an Everywoman — an Everywoman with a Ph.D. (Read our profile of her.) Her testimony was a stark reminder of gender dynamics and of the mental gymnastics required of women who speak up.
Julie Swetnick, who has held a variety of public- and private-sector jobs, including working for federal government agencies, said that Judge Kavanaugh was “present” when she was raped at a high school party.
Dr. Blasey and Ms. Swetnick both said Mark Judge, one of Judge Kavanaugh’s high school friends, was present at the time. Here’s what we know about him.
A culture of heavy drinking, one that some describe as disrespectful to women, emerged as another common theme among the accusations.
Rumors have circulated about the accusers’ allegations. We debunk five viral ones here.
Democrats, meanwhile, applauded Dr. Blasey’s courage and said that her appearance before the committee bolstered her credibility.
The stakes are high, with some Democrats hoping that a derailment of Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation could buy them time to win back the Senate in the November midterm elections, and, consequently, gain control over the confirmation of Mr. Trump’s next nominee.
But Republicans believe the fight over Judge Kavanaugh will help them in tight Senate races — at the likely cost of losing control of the House.
Experts in the law said the judge’s demeanor raised questions about his neutrality and temperament, and asked whether the already fragile reputation of the Supreme Court would be threatened if he is confirmed.
The accusations have rallied survivors of abuse around a new hashtag, #WhyIDidntReport, which highlights the difficulties, fear, anger and shame that so often surround sexual harassment and assault. The onslaught of news about sexual violence can also be emotionally trying. Here’s how some are coping.
Here’s a look at some of the responses to the hearing from the right and the left.
Many see parallels between Dr. Blasey and the other women and Anita Hill, who accused Justice Clarence Thomas of sexual harassment during his Supreme Court confirmation process more than a quarter-century ago.
