Medical insurance generally pays more than dental insurance, so your dentist may be able to bill for services extending beyond tooth care.
DUBLIN, Calif. — On a recent Friday morning, more than 30 dentists and dental staffers gathered in a conference room to learn an arcane new skill: how to bill medical insurers.
Dr. Farrugia’s seminar is a sign of a growing trend in dental offices, as providers seek greater reimbursement for expensive services and patients balk at big bills. Around the internet, firms have popped up claiming expertise in medical billing for dentists and offering courses and consulting services.
The reason is simple: Medical insurance is generally much more generous in its coverage than dental insurance.
Unlike medical coverage, dental insurance is mostly geared to the healthy — something many people don’t realize until they experience serious oral problems and get socked with unexpected costs. Standard dental insurance covers cleanings, fillings and other routine care. But major work like a crown or a bridge is often covered only at 50 percent, and implants generally aren’t covered at all. And dental insurance is usually capped at $1,000 or $1,500 per year.
As a result, people who require extensive reconstructive work often pay many thousands of dollars, or sometimes tens of thousands, in out-of-pocket expenses. Many other people, even with dental coverage, go without care because they cannot afford the large balances or co-payments for crowns, root canals and other major procedures.
Because of these differences in reimbursement, Dr. Farrugia told his seminar attendees, dentists should first consider what medical insurance might cover and then bill the dental plan for the rest.
For example, he said, dentists should seek medical coverage for the full head, neck and mouth exams they perform when they see a new patient, since the goal is to assess more than just the teeth. Medical insurers should also cover oral problems attributable to an underlying medical condition, such as diabetes or dry mouth, a common side effect of many medications, Dr. Farrugia said.
Besides sparing patients the pain of big bills, the strategy can also increase income for dentists, said Dr. Farrugia, who estimated that revenues for his practice rose almost 10 percent the first year he fully implemented medical billing. Patients, too, can learn to file claims for medical reimbursement if their dentists won’t, he said.
On its website, the California Dental Association explains that health insurance should cover costs that are “medically necessary” and lists more than a dozen categories of procedures that could qualify. Among them: treatment related to inflammation and infection, dental repair resulting from injury, certain periodontal surgery procedures and appliances for sleep apnea.
Kristine Grow, a spokeswoman for America’s Health Insurance Plans, the industry trade association, did not dispute that some dental procedures could be covered by medical insurance. However, she cautioned that medical insurers were always on the lookout for abuse.
“Claims that are billed inappropriately or submitted fraudulently hurt everyone because they raise costs,” Ms. Grow said. “It’s important to note that procedures not related to an emergency event or trauma may not be medically necessary, and therefore would not be covered by medical insurance,” she added.
Dr. Farrugia adopted medical billing several years ago after paying more than $100,000 for a CT scanner that produces 3-D images of the bone in the mouth and jaws.
Once he investigated the matter, Dr. Farrugia discovered that medical insurance could be asked to cover not just CT scans but a wide range of services regularly performed by dentists. He buried himself in the arcana of coding, ultimately writing three workbooks for dentists about medical billing.
At first it was trial-and-error, and Dr. Farrugia learned that claims often get rejected if they do not cite a medically legitimate reason for the procedure as well as the appropriate code.
These days, Dr. Farrugia bills medical plans $744 for a CT scan (medical code: CPT 70486), receiving an average reimbursement of about $500. Medical plans generally require pre-authorization for nonemergency CT scans, he said, so his office staff had to learn how to explain why the scan was medically required — such as to assess bone quality.
The same procedure can be billed to a dental plan (dental code: D0367), but the average reimbursement is $125 — if the plan covers CT scans at all. Others are following his example. Dr. Richard Downs, a dentist from Iowa, attended one of Dr. Farrugia’s medical billing seminars last year in Chicago. “I’d never heard these things before,” he said. He said he recently sought and received prior authorization from a medical insurer for $60,000 to cover multiple implants and other costs for a woman whose dental woes stemmed from severe atrophy of the jaw and other medical problems.
Margaret Busch, an office manager for an Arizona dentist, said she planned to start medical billing as soon as she returned from the seminar.
“I’ve been making a list of people that we can go back and probably get money for,” she said, mentioning patients who have had CT scans and those with dental problems related to medical conditions like diabetes.
“I think they’ll be excited,” she said.
