Be genuine. Be interested. And stop hogging the conversation.
Welcome to the Smarter Living newsletter. Editor Tim Herrera emails readers with tips and advice for living a better, more fulfilling life. Sign up here to get it in your inbox.
We all want to be charming, witty conversationalists who can work a room and give people the comfort that they’ve been truly listened to.
Jen Doll, friend of S.L. and one of my absolute favorite writers, wrote this guide that has everything you’ve ever wanted to know about being better at parties. In it is some of the wisest advice on being an engaged conversation partner you’ll find anywhere.
Being someone people enjoy talking with really boils down to being genuine and being genuinely interested. But that’s much easier said than done, so here are three concrete tips from Jen that will help you become a more engaged — and enjoyable — conversation partner.
Don’t enter a conversation with the intent of leaving everyone in stitches, unless perhaps you’re a professional comedian.
“If you just talk a lot you might get exhausted, but if you ask questions and listen and draw people out, they’ll think you’re a great conversationalist,” she said.
He brought up a study in which two researchers from the psychology department at Harvard found that talking about yourself triggers the same pleasure sensation in the brain as food. “People would forgo money in order to talk about themselves,” he said. You can use this to your advantage simply by listening.
Be attentive and give eye contact.
Make active and engaged expressions.
Repeat back what you’ve heard, and follow up with questions.
If you notice something you want to say, don’t say it. Challenge it and go back to listening.
For bonus points, wait an hour to bring up that thing you didn’t say earlier.
And keep in mind that when you say something declarative, seek out the other person’s opinion as well.
What are your tips for making good conversation? Tweet me at @timherrera or email me at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Five Functional Smartwatches Chic Enough for Everyday Wear Finding a smartwatch that balances form and function can be difficult, but these five options offer the features you need to track activity, play music and more.
How to Be Better at Parties Some people love parties! For the rest of us, here’s how to make the most of them.
How (and When) to Limit Kids’ Tech Use If your kids spent too much of their summertime on screen time, here are ideas for teaching them to use technology in a healthy, responsible way.
Gifts That Help Slow the Pace Planning a wedding and getting married is stressful and exhausting; give a gift that helps make post-wedding time off more relaxing.
Finding Gear for Teens to Try Out Hobbies Wirecutter has recommendations for helping tweens and teens explore their creativity.
In a Hurry? Try Express Weight Training A new study finds that you can build strength in just 13 minutes with a single, brief set of each exercise, if you work really hard.
The idea is to experiment to find the natural times we’re at our most productive and attentive, and then capitalize by structuring our days around those rhythms, rather than trying to fit our days into arbitrary cultural expectations of when we should be on.