How one creamy, peppery salad dressing became America’s favorite flavor.
Ranch dressing has risen to prominence by going beyond salad and allying itself with everything from pizza to chicken wings to tortilla chips. Credit...Linda Xiao for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Barrett Washburne.
What makes ranch ranch? It’s a combination of creaminess (from buttermilk, sour cream, sometimes mayonnaise) and herbaceousness (often parsley, thyme, dill), plus a long pull of allium (onion and garlic) and a shot of black pepper. Ranch seasoning eliminates the creamy element, making it a dry spice mix like any other, ready to be added to Chex Mix, shaken onto popcorn or mixed into biscuits.
Ranch on pizza provoked controversy at first, but it is now settled law in much of the country (outside the Northeast, at least). Domino’s offers pizza already topped with ranch dressing, as do many other pizza makers. In March, a successful pop-up restaurant in Portland, Ore., called Ranch, became a permanent restaurant entirely dedicated to pizza with ranch. Anthony Falco, a noted pizza authority in Brooklyn, took to Instagram: “This is what happens when you legalize cannabis,” he teased.
When the chef Matt Hyland and his ranch-loving wife, Emily Hyland, opened the first Emily pizza restaurant in Brooklyn, the house-made ranch they drizzled over certain pies was considered bizarre by many New Yorkers.
“The thing is, pizza is a little bit tangy and a little bit spicy,” Mr. Hyland said. “Something creamy and herbal rounds it out.” The Hylands now have four restaurants in the city, so apparently their taste for ranch is shared by locals.
Every dish on the menu contains some form of ranch: the house Bloody Mary is made with ranch-infused vodka and has a ranch-salt rim on the glass. To create new dishes, said Mr. Hayden, he and his fellow founder, Chad Allen, start by dreaming up a new ranch flavor — like Greek, with feta cheese and oregano, or curry, with yogurt and Indian spices.
The modern passion for ranch has not gone unnoticed by ambitious chefs. At the Charter Oak in the Napa Valley, an informal new offshoot of the luxurious Restaurant at Meadowood, the chefs Christopher Kostow and Katianna Hong serve an appetizer described on the menu as “raw vegetables from our farm, fermented soy dip.” It is essentially crudités with ranch dressing.
Many other chefs are also bending ranch to their creative will. The Middle Eastern restaurant Samesa in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, serves a ranch made with labneh (a thick yogurt), alongside chicken wings crusted with the spice mix za’atar. Parcel 32 in Charleston, S.C., sends out “cumin buttermilk herb aioli,” a reworked ranch, with hot and spicy quail. At Compère Lapin in New Orleans, the chef Nina Compton has invented a complex plate of jerk-roasted corn on the cob, topped with crunchy ranch-infused bread crumbs.
“I think she would come back from the grave and haunt us if we changed it,” Ms. Wilson-Potts said.
