You’ll need some double clicks to finish this Melinda Gates and Joel Fagliano puzzle.
WEDNESDAY PUZZLE — In this episode of The Times’s celebrity constructor series, Joel Fagliano worked with Melinda Gates, formerly of Microsoft, currently of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, to make a grid with a subtle wink of a trick that I really enjoyed.
The Gates Foundation was formed in 2000 and has grown exponentially in size and influence since then, focusing mainly on equalizing of the quality of human life by addressing the problems that afflict the world’s poorest. As overwhelming as that mission may seem, there has been progress (if you missed this piece by the Gateses, there are reasons to be optimistic).
As far as the puzzle went, I thought the cluing was lovely: mostly straightforward and smart, with a sprinkle of gentle humor.
There were some good literary references today — one in the themes, as well as J.M. BARRIE and Audre LORDE — and some visual media, too, with a TV show and a movie director in the theme entries, and references to the RAT PACK, Whoopi Goldberg’s much-loved Oda MAE Brown, and the filmmaker SAM RAIMI.
19A: I am sorry that I didn’t remember this president’s Nobel Peace Prize. I knew Teddy Roosevelt had gotten one (for ending the Russo-Japanese war) but couldn’t shoehorn him in, and for a few minutes I thought that it might be Ms. Gates name-dropping “Barack” (who was awarded the prize in 2009). This entry could also have been “Wilson” (for establishing the League of Nations), but here we’ve got Jimmy CARTER, who won in 2002, and whom I marvel at these days as he continues to build houses for people.
66A: It’s not exactly a Jekyll/Hyde thing, but a decade ago, when Beyoncé was becoming a star, she conjured up a wilder alternate persona she called Sasha FIERCE. She’s not alone: A lot of stars have done this. I sometimes consider doing so myself, but a double life as an ordinary person sounds completely exhausting.
7D: I adored this clue and entry and wouldn’t be surprised to see FERRIC, or “of iron,” take off as lingo of the cognoscenti at some point — it just works so well as a wry comment for ironic situations. Perhaps this has already happened at some point, I’d never know.
12D: There are lots of pretty and interesting variations of animals’ coat colors, and a lot of names to describe those various colors. BLUE ROAN horses really do look steely blue, especially at a distance.
39D: We’ve just mentioned iron and steel; here’s an entry that has to do, historically, with the Bronze Age. As far back as 3000 B.C. or so, the CYCLADES, by virtue of their geographical arrangement and geological makeup, were the site of an advanced metalworking culture that traded extensively throughout the known world.
48D: A new school for me — I had never heard of ECKERD College in St. Petersburg, Fla.
There are six clever puns that follow the same rule, scattered through today’s across clues at 17A, 29A, 37A, 40A, 46A and 67A. Each one is a common term with a little bit of a glitch, the kind you might type on a sticky keyboard, or say with a bit of trepidation, and that glitch leads to a whole new meaning that answers the clue you’re given.
The first place I got a toehold on this was on the left-hand side, where we were lucky enough to have two answers in close enough proximity to give away the game. For whatever reason, it was a little random bit of trivia in the back of my head that got things going — I knew that J.J. Abrams was the director in question at 37A, and I also knew of J. Crew from shopping (natch); given the clue, “Ones on set with” would be a crew, right? So the mash-up sort of worked and I filled in JJCREW.
With a few other crosses, then, JM BARRIE became apparent as the “Pan creator” at 38D — we’re talking Peter Pan, here. I tried JABS at 37D, which led to BB at the start of 46A. B.B. King? Why not — I’d been thinking Martin Luther, but B.B. works. A group of buildings, we know, is a “complex” — so you get BB COMPLEX here, a pun built off a vitamin.
Once I knew what to look for, the other four theme entries fell into place — think of an obstetric procedure, a television talent show, and a Kindle. The clue at 40A was a little one that I was able to fill in on crosses, but I thought that maybe a clue invoking fashion might be clearer.
Like some wordplay, I was left (erroneously) thinking “Oh, there must be tons of these!” There really aren’t, if you keep with the rule that the repeated letters must make sense as an element to the clue; I think that Joel and Ms. Gates harvested the prime examples.
Melinda Gates: To understand how much of a thrill it is for me to co-author The New York Times crossword today, you should also know I’m a lifelong lover of puzzles. That’s actually one of the things that first brought Bill and me together. When we were dating, I brought a more than 1,000-piece jigsaw puzzle of the Eiffel Tower to his house. I thought we’d do what my family used to do and leave it on the table for the next few months, occasionally adding a few pieces here and there. It turns out I overestimated our ability to walk away from a challenge. Bill and I finished that puzzle in a single weekend.
Over the years, I’ve come to realize that our shared love of puzzles is more than just a hobby. You might even say it’s part of our worldview. I think there’s a lot of value in throwing yourself into problems that seem daunting and reminding yourself that with time and effort, they, too, become doable. Find that one edge piece, and the whole bottom corner begins to arrange itself. Get that one Across hint, and the name of that Eagles song comes rushing back. You simply begin applying what you know until you wear away at the edges of the things you don’t. In other words, you just start. And the more puzzles you solve, the more confidence you have to tackle the next one.
I hope it does what puzzles do best and gets you to look at challenges — even tough ones — not with resignation but with determination. If it does, you might be interested in an event Bill and I are hosting today, called Goalkeepers. We’ll be talking about why we’re optimistic that the fight against poverty is winnable and why we think investing in young people is essential to the healthier, better future we’re all working toward.
Joel Fagliano: The genesis of this puzzle is actually a Melinda Gates tweet in which she stated that “anyone who knows me knows I love puzzles.” Naturally, that piqued our interest in including her in our celebrity crossword series. I jumped at the chance to be the one who got to collaborate with her, as I’m a huge admirer of the selfless work she does for the world.
We started by brainstorming themes based off her various initiatives, which included one on women’s empowerment titled “The XX Factor.” Well, that got my constructor wordplay brain whirring, and I was able to generate some other puns in a similar vein, and we had our theme. For constructing the grid, I gave Melinda three or four options for potential fills in each corner, allowing her to pick and choose the words she connected with most. BLUE ROAN was an example of an entry I didn’t know much about that Melinda loved, as equestrian is a big deal in her family. Finally, Melinda wrote most of the clues — and came up with some real gems, I should add. “Hoppy mediums” for ALES was my favorite of hers.
One final shout out to Melinda’s indispensable aide Beth Giudicessi, who helped immensely with putting this together. Hope solvers enjoy the final product!
Been at this a while?
Subscribers can take a peek at the answer key.