A pair of powerful storms claimed lives and devastated communities on opposite ends of the earth last weekend: Hurricane Florence, which battered the Carolinas with persistent rain and flooding, and Typhoon Mangkhut, which slammed the northern Philippines and Hong Kong before moving on to mainland China.
Dozens of Times journalists around the world are covering the impact and aftermath of both storms, and we are providing open and unlimited access to our coverage.
Dozens of people have died from Typhoon Mangkhut, which passed over the Philippines this weekend and went on to carve a path through China. Meteorologists described it as the world’s most powerful storm this year.
Retrace Mangkhut’s movement and explore a 3-D model of rainfall within the storm.
The typhoon, which at its peak was equivalent to a Category 5 hurricane with 170-mile-an-hour winds, weakened as it passed over mainland China. But it had already taken a considerable toll.
By late Monday, at least 66 deaths had been attributed to the storm in the Philippines, with that number almost certain to rise, according to an unofficial count from the police. More than 40 bodies there had been recovered from the muddied wreckage of a landslide. Our reporters are on the ground in Itogon, the town where the landslide took place.
North Carolina has suffered record rainfall, floods and deaths from Florence, which made landfall as a Category 1 hurricane and was downgraded to a tropical storm hours later. See what the powerful storm looks like from land and from space.
In China, the state media reported that at least four people had died in Guangdong, a coastal province. The storm also left a swath of damaged buildings and scores of injuries in Hong Kong and Macau. Here are some photos of the aftermath.
Rising ocean temperatures have fueled some of the most devastating storms in recent years. Kendra Pierre-Louis, a reporter on The New York Times’s climate team, explains how.
Strong winds, deadly storm surges and a trail of destruction. Recent hurricanes have wreaked havoc in the United States. And you might be wondering, how does a hurricane work? So, the important thing to understand about hurricanes is that they only form over warm water. Think of warm water as the fuel to the engine that is a hurricane. A hurricane forms when warm air over the ocean rises. As that warm air rises, cool air sort of fills in below it, kind of creating that cyclonic action. At the top, it forms clouds, and those clouds create the rain system that we associate with hurricanes. So, many people are wondering, is climate change making hurricanes worse? Yes. Remember we talked about how warm water is the fuel for a hurricane? Because of climate change, the oceans are much warmer than they used to be. In recent years, we’ve seen very powerful hurricanes like Harvey and Florence. And the obvious question is, what do they have in common? Both of these hurricanes formed in unusually warm waters. Hurricane Harvey formed in waters around the Gulf of Mexico that were, on average, about 1 degree Celsius warmer than average. So, that’s a lot more energy going into the storm. So, does this mean we’re going to have more storms like this? The short answer is yes. The longer answer is storms like this are even worse. There’s some talk about potentially raising the hurricane category scale to include a 6 for stronger winds than we currently have. There is some concern or some evidence suggesting that hurricanes are moving further north. So, that means they’re going to show up in places that they haven’t traditionally existed and, potentially, even in places like Europe. When there’s a hurricane, when there’s a wildfire, climate change often comes up. But climate change is our new reality. And if we don’t take steps to mitigate it, we will continue to see powerful, severe hurricanes. And more and more people are going to be put in harm’s way.
Animated maps and satellite images show the effects of the storm.
Chaos continued to reign over parts of the Carolinas even as the region emerged from the grip of a storm with a destructive power unlike any the area had seen in a generation.
The devastation was wide-ranging.
At least 33 people have died in North and South Carolina because of Florence.
In North Carolina, floodwaters swept away part of a wall holding back a pond of toxic substances and overran several lagoons of pig waste. Tens of thousands were left without power and, in New Bern, N.C., public housing residents wondered what will become of their flooded homes.
In both Carolinas, churches provided literal and spiritual refuge.
If you are in an affected area, here are five things you can do to avoid the dangers of flooding.
Evacuation orders can pose special challenges for the elderly and disabled. Here’s expert advice for those who cannot or will not evacuate.
We also have tips for travelers affected by the storm and advice on how to use technology to your advantage.
And here’s how to help those affected by Florence and what you can do for victims of Mangkhut.