At 43, Sarah Kauss is old enough to remember going to high school before water came from plastic bottles.
“We would drink out of the water fountain,” she said.
By the time she enrolled at the University of Colorado Boulder, in 1993, the bottled-water trend had caught on, but so had environmental consciousness. She remembers being presented with a form containing a pledge not to use plastics. She signed.
Now settled in New York City — her office is a short walk from Madison Square Park in Manhattan — she wants to put something in students’ backpacks besides the usual kaleidoscopic batch of pencils and notebooks, along with the inevitable smushed snacks and the obligatory headphones: Reusable, stainless-steel water bottles.
She cannot guarantee that students will use them, although City Hall and the Department of Education will work on that, with a program beginning this week called Bring It.
The goal is to slow the seemingly inexhaustible stream of discarded plastic bottles that clog waterways, threatening marine life, and that pile up in landfills. City officials say Bring It could lead to students using 54 million fewer single-use plastic bottles this school year. That also puts S’well well on the way toward its own goal of displacing 100 million bottles by 2020.
Obviously, it is a question that has come up often as the country has debated pollution and environmental consciousness has surged. In April, Councilman Rafael L. Espinal Jr., a Democrat from Brooklyn, and Councilman Ben Kallos, a Democrat from the Upper East Side, proposed a ban on selling disposable plastic bottles in city-run parks, golf courses and beaches. The measure would cover soft drinks and juices as well as water. Other proposals would ban plastic straws that can be used only once, or plastic bags.
Mr. Chambers sees Bring It and the S’well bottles as “a great opportunity for us to make a strong public statement around why this matters” — and it is a statement that can be made without having to wait for a City Council vote.
The program will also extend S’well’s brand identity, of course, but Ms. Kauss put it differently. “This extends our mission,” she said. “I started this company because I wanted people to stop using single-use plastic bottles.” She hopes students will become “foot soldiers telling friends, telling families, using in soccer and after-school programs” about the importance of switching to bottles they can refill time and again.
By 2014, Fortune magazine was saying that what S’well produced “may be just a water bottle, but it is the sine qua non of water bottles — suddenly a feverish must-be-associated-with thing among a certain stylish, in-the-know set.” By then S’well had been featured in O, the Oprah Magazine, and its bottles were available in retail chains like J. Crew. S’well’s first customer had been a place she knew well, the Harvard Business School. She had received a master’s degree in business administration there in 2005.
So did walks on the beach, she said. “Every time we’d go,” she said, “we’d take a plastic bag and fill it up with trash,” she said.
In New York, every public school has been required to appoint a “sustainability coordinator” to promote sustainability since 2009. An analysis by Teachers College at Columbia University looked at the roles coordinators play and found that 40 percent of them are teachers, a third are assistant principals and the rest have other jobs, from secretaries to administrators. The analysis found that they tend to focus on resource management and recycling.
