My favorite time of the year is finally here!
Ms. Konc is a humor writer and essayist.
I love watching the leaves change from green to majestic oranges, reds and golds. It is a beautiful reminder that even in death, foliage will do anything to make a situation all about them.
I love participating in the harmless spooks and scares of the season. Like how every year around Halloween, the children scream when they see me wearing a jack-o’-lantern on my head — until I take off the hollowed-out pumpkin and reveal that it’s just me, a regular old snaggletoothed man with triangle eyes.
I love building a crackling fire on a cool night. Even if you don’t have the space to build your own fire, you can just go to the fire station and follow the trucks around: Sooner or later, you’ll find one! But bring your own marshmallows — the firefighters do NOT provide them. I learned this the hard way.
I love going door to door singing the old, beloved fall carols like “Thanksgiving Prince” and “Squirrel Rot Rock.” I just love watching my neighbors’ faces light up as they peer at me through a crack in their blinds and silently feel around for the alarm. That’s fall, to me.
I love the romance of the season, like coming home to reveal that I’ve made a sexy new pair of cable-knit thigh-highs and a cranberry-and-popcorn-strung garter belt.
I love watching high school football games on Friday nights. There’s just something about watching a young man score the winning touchdown and knowing that decades later he will look back and realize that he has been chasing the purity of feeling he had that night on the football field ever since and found that nothing — not the day of his wedding, not the start of his business, not the birth of his child — has come close.
Jeans, hoodies, tea, boots, bright leaves, chilly days, candy corn, sweaters, scarves. Breath ghosts, spider dads, wet socks, gourd tea. Cold nights, warm fires, roasted marshmallows. Mosquito corpses, sentient acorns, apple cider screaming. Cinnamon school supplies. Nutmeg weather. Pumpkin bowling, gourd illusions, a pine cone doing Whole 30. Escaped prisoners, unfulfilled desires, a therapy dog I’m not sure if I can pet. All of it. Just all of it.
Riane Konc is a humor writer and essayist.
