Shows like “Love & Hip Hop” offer nuanced portrayals of women of color. They’re not a guilty pleasure.
Dr. Gates specializes in African-American media, particularly representations of race in popular film and television.
Why do people call reality television a guilty pleasure? Why do so many reject the possibility that the trashiest of shows, like VH1’s “Love & Hip Hop,” might have a lot to tell us about society, women and power? Shows like this aren’t fluff — they’re subversive, self-aware and capable of depicting the complexities of women of color in nuanced ways.
Many critics claim that the appeal of reality TV is schadenfreude. Others say it regurgitates tired stereotypes that “quality” programming left behind long ago. I’m a scholar of media studies, and to me, the appeal of reality TV is something more intriguing and radical. It’s that the women on these shows reject social norms about “respectable” femininity. And they are unapologetic about it.
“Love & Hip Hop,” which will start its ninth season in November, follows the personal and professional lives of the women, and sometimes men, connected to the hip-hop music industry. It’s often referred to as an example of a “ratchet” reality show, meaning that it is trashy and low quality. “Love & Hip Hop” has received a lot of criticism (along with other VH1 reality shows like “Basketball Wives” and “Black Ink Crew”) because of the over-the-top behavior of some of its cast members and its sensational story lines, aspects of the show that, for many people, slip into damaging clichés.
Take a recent episode of “Love & Hip Hop Hollywood.” Brooke Valentine, a cast member, tells her girlfriends that she found an engagement ring in the possession of her on-again-off-again boyfriend. So what did she do? She promptly slipped it on her finger and declared herself engaged. To Ms. Valentine, it was immaterial whether or not her boyfriend agreed.
On the one hand, Ms. Valentine’s “engagement on a technicality” may seem to play into a troubling representation of a black woman: someone who schemes and connives to achieve her romantic goal, rather than follow the ladylike conventions for how engagements and marriages are supposed to happen.
Yet on the other hand, her willful claiming of the engagement ring and of the title “fiancée” upends the traditional marriage proposal, in which women are the objects of a life-changing decision and never the agents. Ms. Valentine’s attitude and behavior may appear “ratchet” because of how it bucks convention. But her actions should also remind us that such traditions were not conceived with women of color in mind, anyway.
This is not to say that reality television is beyond reproach. As a genre, it flourishes in large part because of unfair labor practices. The cast and crew on these shows don’t always receive fair wages. And although the shows are ostensibly unscripted, they’re often heavily produced.
Some might cite this as yet another example of why television, and society, would be better off without the genre. Yet reality TV gives us an unfiltered window onto the capitalist and ideological structures that make up all media. And so, rather than see it as a failure that women like Ms. Valentine refuse to adhere to conventional scripts, I believe that we should read it as a form of resistance.
It is easy to lament society’s fall from civility when Tommie Lee, on “Love & Hip Hop Atlanta,” screams and hurls epithets at her mother during a particularly vicious argument. Yet at the same time, Ms. Lee’s hurt, the feeling of a lifetime of emotional and physical abandonment by the woman responsible for her care, resonates with viewers who may share her complicated filial emotions, even if they do not identify with her conduct.
In a scripted drama, this scenario would most likely build to a happy resolution and the family would reunite. But in the world of “Love & Hip Hop,” the angst, the hurt, the betrayal — feelings that women of color are not often allowed to express — make up the backbone of the season. These “ratchet” reality shows offer a kind of empathy most often found in soap operas and melodrama, the two genres that “Love & Hip Hop” most closely resembles.
What’s more, “Love & Hip Hop" has always included queer characters of different races, ethnicities and class backgrounds. And while the show occasionally falls into tired clichés, particularly with queer men of color, I would offer that this is partly a result of the number of queer characters and story lines on the show.
So let’s stop criticizing the shows and instead engage more thoughtfully with their stylistic and narrative elements. If we did, we’d find women eschewing traditional definitions of what it means to be a wife or a mother. We’d see queer people casting aside conventional modes of gender. We’d recognize men suffering under the burden of patriarchy. And we’d know that all of them are constantly walking a fine line between being self-aware and having agency, and being obligated to perform for the networks that employ them.
“Ratchet” reality TV shows are already in the metaphorical gutter. Yet this may be a blessing rather than a curse, as they are unburdened by the limitations of being “positive” representations. And that is the power of these shows, their ability to help us explore what it means to navigate life as people of color in all of its fraught, messy and yes, sometimes ratchet realities.
