The television broadcast was cheery as ever and rebranded to address criticism. But behind the scenes, there’s a “kind of a civil war” brewing.
ATLANTIC CITY — If you tuned into the Miss America pageant last night, you may have noticed a few changes.
For starters, this year’s event was called a “competition,” not a “pageant.” The participants were “candidates” — interviewing for the job of Miss America — not “contestants.” There was no runway this year, and the word “Miss” had been stripped from the sashes, though each still had a little pocket that could conceal a lipstick tube.
And, of course, in the wake of #MeToo, there were no swimsuits.
The group included a neuroscience graduate from Harvard and a software developer for Microsoft whose platform was women in STEM. Candidates spoke about surviving cancer, growing up with incarcerated parents and campus sexual assault.
Four of the five finalists, including the winner, Nia Imani Franklin of New York, were women of color.
But what may not have been visible to those watching were the growing pains of Miss America 2.0. It’s “kind of a civil war,” said Kirsten Haglund, the 2008 winner. Behind the scenes, state and local volunteers plotted a coup against Ms. Carlson, and the reigning Miss America blasted her on the “Today” show.
Miss America has long touted itself as more than a beauty pageant, claiming — somewhat dubiously — to be the largest provider of scholarship money to young women in the country.
Over the years, the century-old organization has been opposed by religious groups and women’s rights activists. It has suffered internal dissent — in 1950, the pageant winner Yolande Betbeze refused to pose in a swimsuit during her reign — and external pressures.
Later, there was that year the producers attempted to rebrand the competition as a reality show; the era that the show moved to Las Vegas (and cable); and the scandal of 1984, when Vanessa Williams, the first black Miss America, was stripped of her crown after it was revealed that she had appeared in Penthouse (the Miss America organization later apologized).
More recently, viewership has dipped, as has the number of women enrolled as candidates. Claims of scholarship donations have been questioned and debunked.
The audience turnout has certainly been declining.
This year program staff handed out fliers to random passers-by on the boardwalk, offering free tickets to fill up empty seats. “All you need to do is get dressed up, really nice, and show up to Boardwalk Hall,” the flier read. Production staff said they pass these out every year, but this time, they had a reconfigured arena with fewer seats and they still had to give up more free seats.
Maybe the usual crowds were turned off by the drama.
Last December, it was revealed that Sam Haskell, the C.E.O., had sent vicious and lewd emails about former competitors, a move that only reinforced the perception of Miss America as retrograde and sexist.
Ms. Carlson, who had become a leading figure in the #MeToo movement after her sexual harassment lawsuit against Fox, seemed like a perfect replacement — one who would help reform the pageant’s image.
And on Saturday, the day before the pageant, in perhaps the greatest show of revolt, more than 50 state leaders met privately in a hotel conference room to voice discontent with Ms. Carlson, and discuss legal action.
It’s not a movie, but it is a show.
This year, Miss Vermont’s costume evoked her state’s maple leaves and Miss Alabama’s outfit was NASA-themed. Miss Georgia had Coca-Cola bottles on her shoes and Miss Mississippi festooned hers with hot air balloons.
The women’s costumes didn’t count toward their competitive score. Instead, the candidates were judged on their 20-second answers to two interview questions, 8-second descriptions of their social and political platforms, and their 90-second talent performances.
This year, the talents included singing, clogging, piano, ventriloquism (Miss Texas and two puppets had prepared a song by Johnny Cash), three monologues — including one by Nebraska’s Jessica Shultis about her cancer diagnosis — a choreographed dance “with a ghost” and speed painting by Delaware’s Joanna Wicks, a high school art teacher, who managed to draw a rendition of Wonder Woman upside down, while swaying to Demi Lovato’s “Confident.” Unfortunately, many of these performances didn’t make it into the two-hour special.
During the interview portion, Bridget Oei, a half-Irish, half-Chinese pre-med environmental chemistry graduate from Connecticut, was asked how she would advise women who want to compete but don’t have a fine arts background. It was a chance to address some of the criticism that the competition leaves out those with talents that aren’t usually performed in a gown onstage, like sports or coding.
And protests by N.F.L. players, said Miss Virginia, who won the interview portion of her preliminary competition, aren’t about kneeling — they’re about police brutality.
As for swimsuits: After the show, the newly crowned Miss America, Ms. Franklin, said she was glad she didn’t have to shed her clothes in order to take home a $50,000 scholarship.
The women are “more than just that,” she said.