How good the services are depends on your perspective. For someone like Aretha Franklin, who died last month without a will, the complexity and amount of assets would necessitate an experienced estate lawyer. But she did not have even a basic will, leaving her reported $80 million estate to go through probate, a process that any estate lawyer would make sure a client avoided.
Many Americans can claim kinship with these famous performers in that they probably don’t have a will, either. Nearly 60 percent of Americans have no will, according to a survey this year by Caring.com. And that percentage is higher for people who have dependent children and are most in need of a guide to parcel out their assets should they die while their children are young.
FreeWill costs its users nothing, but it makes its money from the charitable institutions that pay a fee for using the FreeWill service to reach out to donors.
Mr. Schmitt, who during the Obama administration worked on the Democratic National Committee’s midterm fund-raising team, which relied heavily on technology, said he created the site out of frustration. He wanted to write a quick will before taking a trip abroad, leaving his assets to some favorite charities, but he found the existing services cumbersome.
Charley Moore, chief executive of Rocket Lawyer, said that site was designed to be easy to use and offer a simple way for people who needed help to connect with a lawyer.
Rocket Lawyer follows a simple tenet of these sites: Offer free or low-priced services. For a subscription fee of $40 a month, users can work through an array of personal and business legal documents on their own. If questions arise, a lawyer can provide answers online.
Actual time talking with a lawyer who can advise them based on their location and type of question is billed at an hourly rate, and members receive a 40 percent discount.
Another competitor, LegalZoom, bundles conversations with a lawyer into annual packages. Its estate-plan bundle, which includes a will, a trust, a power of attorney and a heath care proxy, costs between $149 and $349, but includes a year of access to a lawyer without an additional charge.
Beth Wolfer, 55, a single mother of three in Salt Lake City, said she needed a will that cost less than that. After testing out various online sites, she settled on FreeWill because as a fund-raiser for Best Friends Animal Society she wanted to offer it to donors as a way to raise money.
Ms. Wolfer said she finished her will in less than an hour, and then had it signed by three witnesses and notarized. Instead of putting it in the vault of a law firm, she handed copies to her daughters and the charities that would receive money upon her death.
Legal practitioners disagree over to what degree technology can substitute for an estate lawyer. Because most Americans do not have a will, laying out their wishes in an online document is generally a good idea. But there are drawbacks, some say.
Even if clients need only a simple will, the online services may miss some nuances, said Richard A. Behrendt, a trust and estates lawyer outside Milwaukee.
“There are so many things that can be done improperly or planning opportunities that could be overlooked if you’re just sitting at your computer trying to make a one-size-fits-all will work for you,” he said.
For one, the online software program may not be asking the right questions or understanding your responses.
Mr. Behrendt, who charges about $2,000 for a complete estate plan — which includes a will and trust but also a power of attorney and a health care proxy — has seen a range of situations in his career.
And he argued that saving a few thousand dollars may prove more costly in the end if assets are not distributed properly or if they end up causing harm to people who receive them.
Still, he understands the reluctance to pay lawyers’ fees. It is common for estate planning fees to run into the tens of thousands of dollars.
The ease of use these online services offer encourage more people to set up wills, which can be a boon to charitable organizations, which get a chance to know their potential donors. Charitable gifts left through estate plans accounted for $35.7 billion in 2017, up 2.3 percent from the year before, according to a Giving USA report released in the spring.
Brian Peterson, the director of legacy and gift planning at Human Rights Watch, said research in the area of planned giving showed that most people put charitable gifts into their final will, which they make in their late 70s or early 80s.
But he also pointed to a report by Russell James III, a professor at Texas Tech University and an expert in planned giving, that said about half of people who put a charitable organization in their wills decided at some point to switch to a different beneficiary. By knowing that people are thinking of leaving it money, a nonprofit organization can cultivate relationships with them, and ensure that the prospective donors are confident their bequest would go to a worthy cause.
