Osaka, 20, moved to the United States at age 3 and grew up idolizing and emulating Williams, one of the pre-eminent champions in sports. She once did a school report on Williams when she was in third grade.
Naomi Osaka became the first Japanese woman to win a Grand Slam singles title, beating her idol Serena Williams, 6-2, 6-4, on Saturday in the United States Open final.
The historic moment was marred by controversy, as Williams grew increasingly incensed at the chair umpire Carlos Ramos for assessing her code violations and ultimately said that officials did not treat men so harshly.
The first code violation was for coaching, after her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou, gestured to her, and resulted in only a warning. Williams told Ramos that she “never cheats.” A few games later, Williams broke her racket, earning a point penalty. When she called Ramos “a thief” for stealing the point from her during a prolonged rant, she was given a game penalty.
At that point Williams called for the tournament referee and supervisor, and complained that her punishment was not fair.
Patrick Mouratoglou, Serena Williams’s coach, admitted after the match that he was trying to give her instructions, which led to her getting the first of three code violations.
But in her postmatch news conference, Williams said she was not being coached.
At regular WTA events, players are allowed coaching visits, but Williams is among the players who do not use them. She said she only looked at her box for encouragement.
The crowd inside Ashe Stadium booed lustily as the trophy ceremony began, drowning out both ESPN’s Tom Rinaldi and U.S.T.A. president Katrina Adams.
Naomi Osaka began to cry, but it didn’t appear to be the tears of joy typical of a champion. It was Williams who tried to calm the crowd down.
Osaka barely smiled through the ceremony, thanked the crowd for watching, and apologized to the fans that their favorite didn’t win.
“I know that everyone was cheering for her, and I’m sorry it had to end like this,” she said.
She didn’t answer when Rinaldi asked, “How does the reality differ from your dreams?” It’s safe to say it did, considerably.
The chair umpire is usually involved in the trophy presentation, but was absent for this one, for obvious reasons.
Naomi Osaka served out the U.S. Open title in emphatic fashion, winning 6-2, 6-4 on a 114 m.p.h. serve out wide on her second championship point that Williams could not wrangle back into her court with her backhand.
Osaka covered her eyes with her visor as she walked to the net in disbelief, and the two embraced at the net.
As she shook Ramos’s hand, Williams said once more: “Can I get an apology?” Williams stewed in the center of the court, attracting more boos from the crowd.
Osaka climbed up to her players box, pulled up by her coach, Sascha Bajin.
Williams saved Osaka’s first championship point with a backhand down-the-line winner.
Serena Williams held for 4-5, then approached supervisor Donna Kelso again, protesting that she was being treated in a “not fair” way. She then sat down on her chair and fought back tears.
As the storm brews, Osaka will now prepare to serve for her first Grand Slam title.
Williams’s ire increased at Ramos at a changeover.
She then attacked him further.
Ramos then gave her a code violation for verbal abuse. Since it was her third, she got a game penalty to put Osaka up, 5-3.
She then called for the referee Brian Earley and the supervisor Donna Kelso.
Williams suggested to Earley that her gender was the reason she was being punished, arguing that men had done much worse.
“Because I’m a woman, you’re going to take this away from me?,” she said.
After breaking for the first time in the match, Williams put herself in a deficit in her ensuing service game with consecutive double faults. When Osaka broke for 2-3 after a Williams backhand unforced error, Williams smashed her racket in anger.
Because it was her second code violation after the coaching warning, she received a point penalty.
Osaka will begin her 2-3 service game up by 15-0.
Serena Williams sought to clarify her disagreement with the chair umpire, Carlos Ramos, during a changeover.
Ramos amicably assuaged her.
Williams earned a break point in the next game, but Osaka saved a long exchange of powerful forehands with a winner down the line on the 19th shot. Williams earned another break point that Osaka saved with an ace out wide, breaking her trend of serving down the T on her three break points. She continued the variety on the third break point she saved in the game, hitting a body serve at Williams that she could not return.
Williams hit a backhand return winner to earn a fourth break point, and after Osaka missed her first serve, Williams pounced on a soft 79 m.p.h. second serve and broke for the first time, taking a 3-1 lead in the second.
Williams received a coaching violation from the chair umpire, Carlos Ramos, in the second game of the second set, citing an apparent gesture made by her coach, Patrick Mouratoglou.
Williams, speaking calmly but forcefully, told Ramos that the gesture was simply encouragement.
Osaka held that game, and then had a break point to go up a set and a break. But Williams saved it by drawing an error from Osaka forehand, gave herself game point with a sly backhand drop shot, then held for 2-1 on an Osaka forehand into the net.
Naomi Osaka has won the first set of the U.S. Open final in dominant fashion, 6-2, over Serena Williams. She clinched it on her first set point, with a 117 m.p.h. body serve that Williams sent back into the net.
Osaka was the more patient and steady of the two, taking advantage of shaky serving from Williams, who made only 38 percent of first serves in the first set. Osaka had an effective pattern of attacking Williams’s backhand.
Williams’s nerves so far are reminiscent of the last Grand Slam final she played against an unproven “next big thing”: Maria Sharapova in the 2004 Wimbledon final. Williams lost that match, 6-1, 6-4.
When the two first played in Miami, Osaka said her first goal was to play well enough to make Williams shout “Come on.” She got that wish in the sixth game of this match, with Williams screaming one of her loudest after going up 15-30 on Osaka’s serve with a forehand winner.
Williams then earned her first break point of the match with a swinging forehand volley to go up 30-40, only for Osaka to save it with a 117 m.p.h. ace down the middle. Williams quickly gained a second break point when Osaka netted a backhand, and this time was able to send back a 116 m.p.h. serve. Osaka won the ensuing nine-shot rally.
Osaka converted her first game point with another 117 m.p.h. serve, this one out wide.
Serving at 1-5, Williams hit her fourth double fault of the match to go down by 0-30, but won four straight points to hold for 2-5, including three unreturned serves.
Osaka will now serve for the first set.
Osaka is off to a commanding lead, leading by a double break, 4-1. The DJ is playing Alicia Keys’s “This Girl is on Fire” during the changeover, appropriately.
Osaka, who is coached by Williams’s longtime hitting partner Sascha Bajin, has started the match with poise and tactical clarity. Osaka has been picking on Williams’s backhand to great effect, drawing five forced errors and four unforced errors off that side already, while holding Williams to zero winners.
Appearing the more nervous of the two, Williams has double-faulted three times.
Serena Williams held to open the match, recovering from a 0-30 deficit. Osaka did the same and then broke Williams to take an early 2-1 lead.
Osaka, who has power to match Williams’s, seems ready to counterpunch. Most points are ending off Williams’s racket, for better or worse.
Osaka won a long exchange of forehands in the third game to level it, and then converted the first break point of the match when Williams double-faulted.
Unsurprisingly, the crowd appears to be on Williams’s side. Shouts of “Let’s go, Serena!” came out before the match began. She was cheered on encouragingly after double-faulting in the second point of the match. When Osaka also double-faulted on her own second service point, the applause seemed to be more in response to Williams winning the point.
Serena Williams and Naomi Osaka have walked onto Arthur Ashe Stadium for the U.S. Open final, which will be officiated by chair umpire Carlos Ramos.
In a prematch interview, Osaka told ESPN’s Tom Rinaldi that “of course I feel like I wouldn’t be human if I wasn’t nervous.” She said she savored the chance to play her idol in a major final.
“I’ve been watching her play Grand Slam finals since I was a kid, so I’m really honored that I’m having this opportunity,” Osaka said of Williams.
Williams is wearing the black version of her tennis tutu by the designer Virgil Abloh, eschewing the periwinkle option.
Under the watchful eye of Billie Jean King, Williams won the coin toss and elected to serve.