Sports|Serena’s Not Alone. Women Are Penalized for Anger at Work, Especially Black Women.
Serena’s Not Alone. Women Are Penalized for Anger at Work, Especially Black Women.
That was the message the tennis great Billie Jean King tweeted on Saturday, responding — as seemingly the rest of the internet has — to Serena Williams’s fraught U.S. Open loss.
In case you’ve been blissfully unplugged: During the match, an umpire penalized Ms. Williams — first because he thought she was coached from the stands, then for what he deemed verbal abuse. (She called him a “liar” and a “thief.”) She’d also broken her racket. It cost her a game, and she lost the match to Naomi Osaka, who then tearfully apologized to the crowd.
As many have pointed out, male tennis players who’ve done similar have not been punished so severely.
It was a microcosm, in so many ways, of what women face at work daily: penalized for expressing emotion (Serena), and apologizing for their success (Naomi). In Ms. Williams’s case, it’s what researchers call “double jeopardy” — a lose-lose situation in which she’s up against both gender and racial stereotypes.
As a woman, she was met with backlash because she abandoned traditionally feminine behaviors: “modest, self-effacing and nice,” said the scholar Joan C. Williams, a professor at Hastings College of the Law. And as a black woman, an added trope that often befalls women of color — loud, angry or simply out of control — was applied to her.
Research has long proved this is true, especially for women at work.
In one study, of job applicants, called “Can an Angry Woman Get Ahead?,” researchers found that expressing anger benefited men who were applying for a job — by increasing their perceived influence. If they were hired, the researchers said, those men were subsequently given more power and autonomy in their jobs. The opposite was true for women.
Another study, of women of color in STEM fields, determined that about 50 percent of women reported backlash when they expressed anger at work, including colleagues and higher-ups calling them out for their tone.
Men, of course, speak directly all the time, she said.
“It becomes another one of those invisible escalators for white men,” Professor Williams said.
For her book “What Works for Women at Work,” which she wrote with her daughter, Professor Williams spoke with over 120 female professionals who worked in senior-level roles at mainstream corporations and asked if they had ever expressed anger on the job. Remarkably, only three said they had ever done it.
So I ask you, readers: Have you ever expressed anger openly at work? If so, did it come back to haunt you?
“Is it any wonder that women, supposedly guaranteed the right to abortion by the Supreme Court, are turning their bitterness to Congress?” posed a 1984 article in The New York Times.
The piece focused on why women’s issues should be a primary focus of that year’s presidential candidates — particularly as they pertained to safe, affordable abortions, which had been legal for 11 years. The article even singled out the town I grew up in, Owensboro, Ky., as an example of a place within a vast region where no facilities existed. “Many women are angry and frustrated,” the article stated.
Like this article? Sign up here to get future installments of Gender Letter delivered to your inbox.
Want us in your Instagram? We gotchu.
Tell me what you think at dearmaya@nytimes.com.