Storms are also expected in the Caribbean and Hawaii; airlines will not charge extra for rebooking.
While the Southeast braces for the first major hurricane of the year later this week, other storms are brewing in the Caribbean and the Pacific. Hurricane season runs June 1 to Nov. 30 annually, but generally peaks in mid-August to late October, according to the National Hurricane Center. Expect travel disruptions in the Mid-Atlantic, Caribbean and Hawaii because of the following four storms. Below are tips for navigating travel during the storms and their aftermaths.
Hurricane Florence, currently a “life threatening” Category 4 storm with 130-mile-per-hour winds, remains on track to hit the Carolinas by Thursday, Sept. 13, according to the National Hurricane Center. The storm may weaken before it makes landfall, but the center warns that the storm surge, rainfall of up to 30 inches, flooding and high winds will exacerbate its scope, which is expected to affect Virginia and parts of surrounding states, including Georgia, Tennessee, Kentucky and West Virginia.
Evacuation orders have been issued for coastal North and South Carolina and areas of Virginia. Follow the path of the hurricane here.
For travelers, the widespread impact is expected to disrupt transportation for several days throughout the East Coast. Amtrak has issued a service alert for the Southeast. Many routes that travel south of Washington, D.C., will be canceled from Wednesday, Sept. 12 to Sunday, Sept. 16. Other routes may be modified. Passengers affected by the storm may be rebooked without a fee by calling |||PHONE_NUMBER||| .
Many airlines are issuing flight waivers, allowing travelers to rebook without extra fees if their flights take place now through Sunday. American Airlines is waiving change fees on flights involving 23 airports in the Carolinas, Georgia and Virginia through Sept. 16 for travel through Sept. 19 in the same class of service. For other rebookings, fliers may be responsible for any fare difference between their original ticket and the new booking.
Delta Air Lines will allow passengers booked to many affected cities to get a refund if their flight is canceled or delayed beyond 90 minutes. Destinations include Charleston and Myrtle Beach, S.C.; Charlotte, Raleigh-Durham and Wilmington, N.C.; and Norfolk and Richmond, Va. Delta is also temporarily waiving baggage and in-cabin pet fees for several affected cities through Sept. 17.
For flights in or out of 16 airports through Sept. 16, United Airlines will waive rebooking fees. Flights may be rescheduled up to a year from when the original ticket was issued. If rebooked travel takes place after Sept. 20, passengers will be responsible for any fare difference.
Southwest Airlines will allow travelers traveling in or out of nine airports in the storm region to rebook without a change fee. Those gateways include Baltimore, Charleston, Charlotte and Washington, D.C. If a flight is canceled, passengers may request a full refund.
JetBlue will waive change and cancellation fees and fare differences for customers traveling today through Sunday to or from eight airports. Passengers with canceled flights may also seek a full refund.
Hotels like the Sanderling Resort on the Outer Banks of North Carolina are taking a wait-and-see approach, noting on its website that it plans to welcome guests again on Monday, Sept. 17, with updates to be posted on its Facebook page. It is refunding all deposits for reservations during the closure.
Cruise ships are also diverting to avoid the storm. The cruise website CruiseCritic.com reports that several lines are making service changes on East Coast itineraries. The Norwegian Escape, currently at sea, will skip a call in Bermuda, which is not in the path of the storm but is expecting a lot of rain, and replace it with one in the Bahamas. Two Carnival ships are also skipping Bermuda in favor of islands further south.
Two other storms are brewing in the Atlantic, including Hurricane Helene tracking north and east in the central Atlantic, expected to dissipate to a tropical storm, with winds between 39 and 73 miles per hour, by Sunday.
Threatening the Caribbean islands, Tropical Storm Isaac is moving west toward the Lesser Antilles by Thursday. Hurricane watches have been issued for Guadeloupe, Dominica and Martinique and tropical storm warnings in Antigua and St. Kitts and Nevis. Currently, the storm has winds up to 70 miles per hour, close to Category 1 hurricane strength.
American Airlines is waiving rebooking fees for 14 Caribbean islands including Antigua, Puerto Rico and St. Lucia for flights scheduled Sept. 12 to 14. Delta Air Lines will refund canceled flights and allow changes without a fee on tickets in or out of San Juan, Puerto Rico, St. Lucia and St. Thomas for flights scheduled Sept. 13 and 14.
On the heels of Hurricane Lane in the Pacific, Tropical Storm Olivia, currently with winds as high as 65 miles per hour, is expected to move through the main Hawaiian islands of Hawaii, Maui and Oahu Tuesday evening, according to the Central Pacific Hurricane Center.
American Airlines will waive change fees for flights to Honolulu and Maui on Sept. 12 and 13. United Airlines will allow free ticket changes on itineraries through Sept. 13 involving five Hawaiian airports.