Lead contamination has been an ongoing crisis in New York City’s public housing, and the Education Department said on Tuesday that it continues to be an issue in schools as well.
In a report, the department said that while it has made progress in eliminating lead in schools over the last year, more than 1,100 water fixtures in city school buildings still have lead levels above the 15 parts per billion threshold that the Environmental Protection Agency allows.
In all, there are 142,411 water fixtures spread over the city’s 1,500 schools — drinking fountains, bathrooms faucets and other sinks used for cooking or washing dishes. Of those, 12,457 tested positive for high levels of lead between 2016 and 2017.
According to the city, 91 percent of contaminated water fixtures in schools have been fixed, leaving 1,165 contaminated fixtures. About 25 percent of the city’s 1,500 schools now have at least one water fixture with elevated lead levels, down from 83 percent of schools last year. The numbers released on Tuesday account for tests conducted from the fall of 2017 until last week.
About 730 fixtures that still have elevated lead and are not used for cooking or drinking have been labeled with signs indicating that they should be used for hand washing only. The remaining 435 water sources, which were used for cooking or drinking, have been turned off, Miranda Barbot, an Education Department spokeswoman, said.
City Hall adopted a new testing system for lead in its public school water fixtures in 2016, after The New York Times reported that the testing method was flawed and was likely concealing lead issues in schools. That turned out to be true, and the city is planning to retest all city schools for lead twice by the end of 2020. The first stage of testing was completed in 2017.
The de Blasio administration has been criticized in the last few months for its handling of lead paint in its deteriorating public housing. A federal monitor is now overseeing the New York City Housing Authority, after prosecutors charged in June that the city had covered up its actions, trained its staff on how to mislead federal inspectors and presented false reports to the government and to the public about its compliance with lead-paint regulations.
Though the city had previously said 19 children in public housing had tested positive for elevated levels of lead, the city’s Department of Health said that 820 children younger than 6 living in Nycha housing had elevated levels of lead. The health department did not trace any of those elevated blood levels back to public schools.
Lead can have serious consequences for children’s brain development and the issue of lead in water was brought to the forefront by the water crisis in Flint, Mich.
Earlier this year, federal prosecutors found that “accountability often does not exist” at the beleaguered housing authority.
At some of the schools in the city’s report, more fixtures were found to be contaminated in the latest round of testing. There are 27 fixtures with elevated lead levels at Harry S. Truman High School in the Baychester section of the Bronx, but only 11 water sources were found to have high levels of lead when they were first tested in early 2017.
At I.S 104 in Manhattan, 25 water sources tested above the lead threshold in the latest round of testing, but just three water sources had elevated lead when the school was tested in January 2017. Ms. Barbot said that was because the schools had added new fixtures.
Other schools have been more successful in reducing lead in its water fixtures. William E. Grady Career and Technical Education High School in Brighton Beach, Brooklyn, for example, had 101 fixtures with high lead levels when it was tested in late 2016; it now has none.
