JERUSALEM — Syrian forces accidentally shot down a Russian military plane after an Israeli airstrike on Syrian territory, Kremlin officials said Tuesday, the worst case of friendly fire for Russia in the Syrian war.
The accident on Monday night briefly caused a crisis in Russia-Israel relations as the Kremlin blamed the Israelis, underscoring the risks of escalation from unintended consequences among the different forces operating in Syria.
All 15 Russian service members aboard were killed in the antiaircraft barrage that downed the plane, which had apparently been misidentified by Syrian gunners as Israeli.
Russia intervened in Syria three years ago to help President Bashar al-Assad prevail in a brutal civil war. The Russians have shown extraordinary tolerance toward Israel’s military, which has carried out more than 200 airstrikes over two years in Syria aimed at Iran-backed Shiite militias that Israel regards as a threat.
Despite anger by the Russian military, fears of a Russia-Israel confrontation were dampened by Russia’s president, Vladimir V. Putin. He blamed “a chain of tragic accidental circumstances,” and not just Israel, for the downing of the plane, an Ilyushin Il-20 surveillance aircraft.
Earlier, the Russian Defense Ministry had angrily accused Israel of hiding its F-16s behind the Russian plane, effectively turning the less stealthy Russian Il-20 into a target for Syria’s antiaircraft missiles. Russia also suggested that Israel had abused the countries’ coordination system that is meant to avoid such accidents, by providing only a minute’s notice before its fighters struck a Syrian air base — too little time for the Russian plane to avoid the crossfire.
Russia, Mr. Shoigu told senior military officials, had informed Israel that “we are not going to leave such actions, such steps, unanswered,” the news agency Interfax reported.
But there was no mention in the Kremlin’s account of the telephone conversation of any warning of possible Russian retaliation.
In a departure from its normal policy of declining to comment on military actions, the Israeli Defense Forces released a lengthy statement that expressed sorrow for the loss of life and held Mr. Assad’s government “fully responsible.” It added that Iran and Hezbollah, the Shiite militant group that operates in Syria and that is a bitter enemy of Israel, were also accountable.
Citing an “intolerable threat,” Israel said its jets were targeting a military facility in Syria from which weapons-manufacturing systems were to be transferred to Hezbollah in Lebanon. It added that the antiaircraft missiles fired by Syria had been inaccurate and had been fired indiscriminately.
The statement also said that the Russian jet was not in the area when Israeli warplanes made their attack on the Syrian weapons facility, and that the Israeli jets were back in Israel’s airspace at the time the surveillance plane was shot down.
Israel has long enjoyed Russia’s tacit support in pursuing an agenda of preventing Iran from establishing a military presence in Syria and from supplying Hezbollah with advanced weaponry. That has required extensive efforts to guard against inadvertent incidents, with close coordination at various levels of the chain of command.
Mr. Netanyahu has assiduously sought Mr. Putin’s acquiescence, with nine visits to Moscow in the last three years.
The state-controlled Russian news media, which fumed against Turkey in 2015 and denounced Turkey’s president, Recep Tayyip Erdogan, as a gangster and criminal, gave only measured coverage of the plane’s downing and obscured Syria’s responsibility.
This is in keeping with the Kremlin’s policy of generally playing down Russian losses in a Syrian conflict that Moscow joined in September 2015. Accused by his critics of military adventurism, Mr. Putin has sought to present Russia’s military support for Mr. Assad as a mostly cost-free operation that asserts Russian influence as a great power and affords its armed forces opportunities to train for combat in other theaters.
Russia has been Mr. Assad’s most important backer during Syria’s civil war, which is now approaching eight years. It has sent warplanes and troops to support him, including the recent deployment of warships to the region.
State television on Tuesday focused not on the loss of the Russian plane but on the inauguration of Moscow’s mayor, Sergei Sobyanin, a Putin loyalist who was re-elected on Sept. 9, and a meeting between Mr. Putin and President Viktor Orban of Hungary.
The shooting down of the plane came on the same day that Mr. Shoigu, Russia’s defense minister, said that Syria would refrain from launching an offensive on Idlib Province, the last significant piece of territory in Syria that Mr. Assad does not control.
Mr. Shoigu’s announcement came after Mr. Putin and Mr. Erdogan — who now has warm relations with the Russian leader despite their bitter rift in 2015 — agreed to establish a demilitarized zone in Idlib.
At least three million Syrian civilians and 30,000 insurgent fighters, including Qaeda-linked jihadists, have been cornered in Idlib. Rights advocates had warned of a blood bath there in the event of an all-out assault by the Syrians. Mr. Assad has vowed, however, to eventually reassert control over the entire country.