There are likely few things lower on Mayor Bill de Blasio’s wish list than stumping for Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
For years, the two men have openly warred with each other over everything from subway funding to naps. They have questioned each other’s judgment and tried to undermine the other’s policies. And before last week’s primary election, Mr. de Blasio studiously evaded questions about whom he wanted to see emerge victorious, declining to endorse either Mr. Cuomo or Cynthia Nixon.
But by the time the mayor, the governor and a swarm of other Democratic officials gathered Tuesday in a humid conference room in the Times Square Sheraton in Manhattan to promote party unity before the general election, it was not as if Mr. de Blasio had many other options. Five days earlier, Mr. Cuomo had engineered a commanding primary victory against Ms. Nixon, Mr. de Blasio’s longtime friend and supporter, and Mr. de Blasio had seemingly run out of excuses to stay out of the race.
And so it was that Mr. de Blasio ended up with a front-row seat — literally, sitting next to the governor at one point — as Mr. Cuomo trumpeted his decisive victory in one of the highest-turnout state primary elections in recent memory.
“Excited” would not have been the best word to describe the mayor’s demeanor as he took the stage after the governor, but “pained” would not be quite right either.
Pragmatic, perhaps. Decently convincing.
Of course, that did not mean that the two men were not going to swipe at each other in subtle ways.
Mr. Cuomo, as usual, dedicated most of his speech to attacking President Trump, but not before taking a moment to sneer again at the “genius pundits” who had predicted a low turnout, or the “theoretical or abstract” ideas about the definition of progressive government. It was the same tone he had adopted the day after the primary, when he dismissed the so-called progressive wave that Ms. Nixon’s allies had predicted would take him down; and it was the same attack he has repeatedly lobbed at Mr. de Blasio, an idealist compared to Mr. Cuomo and his more centrist pragmatism.
Mr. de Blasio, for his part, singled out the ouster of the former members of the State Senate’s Independent Democratic Conference, a group of Democrats who had collaborated with Republicans, declaring that he would not miss them at all. Ms. Nixon had accused Mr. Cuomo of enabling the I.D.C.; Mr. Cuomo did not mention the I.D.C. on Tuesday.
Then Mr. de Blasio turned to the topic of Mr. Trump. He recalled that “there were folks in our party who thought about maybe trying to get along with President Trump” after the 2016 election. The mayor did not mention names, but Mr. Cuomo had said after the election that Mr. Trump’s being from New York could prove a “bonus” for the state.
Indeed, Mr. Cuomo has recently made Mr. Trump a favorite rhetorical target, often preferring to speak about him instead of Ms. Nixon during the primary campaign. That seemed unlikely to change for the general election: In his speech Tuesday, Mr. Cuomo called Mr. Trump the “Bernie Madoff” of politics and a fomenter of civil war between red and blue states. He never said the name of his Republican opponent, Marcus Molinaro.
But if there was any illusion that the impetus for the tortured family reunion was anything but pure necessity, Mr. Cuomo seemed to quickly dispense with that.
