Bill Daily, the television actor known for playing goofily affable and warmhearted pals on “I Dream of Jeannie” and “The Bob Newhart Show,” died on Tuesday at his son’s home in Santa Fe, N.M. He was 91.
Patterson Lundquist, his manager and publicist, announced the death on Saturday.
In “Jeannie,” Mr. Daily played Maj. Roger Healey, an astronaut and best friend of Maj. Anthony Nelson, played by Larry Hagman, whose life changes when he falls in love with a blond genie, played by Barbara Eden. The show ran from 1965 to 1970, and Mr. Daily was in 131 episodes.
Years later, Mr. Lundquist said, Mr. Daily expressed surprise that people were still watching and that they remembered him.
“When people would ask about him, he was always, like, ‘Really? They care?’ ” Mr. Lundquist said on Sunday.
In an interview in 2003, Mr. Daily recounted how he had landed the role. He said Sidney Sheldon, the creator of “Jeannie,” had seen him on the television series “Bewitched” and asked him if he would try out for the role of “Man in Uniform” on his show. Mr. Daily agreed.
After trying out, he said, Mr. Daily was surprised to learn that Mr. Sheldon had changed the script to make him Mr. Hagman’s “second banana.” Mr. Daily said he had once asked Mr. Sheldon why.
But the two actors had good chemistry and would often improvise lines, Mr. Lundquist said. Mr. Daily wrote one episode, titled “Jeannie the Matchmaker,” in which Jeannie and Major Nelson tried to set Major Healey up with potential partners.
On “The Bob Newhart Show,” which ran from 1972 to 1978, Mr. Daily played a perpetually jet-lagged airline navigator, Howard Borden, who was the neighbor of Mr. Newhart’s Dr. Robert Hartley. The two actors were friends in real life, having met in the 1950s at a Halloween party in Chicago before they became well known, Mr. Lundquist said.
The show was filmed in front of a live audience, and Howard Borden’s jittery nature was genuine. Mr. Daily said he had occasionally been nervous about forgetting his lines, and because he was dyslexic it was hard for him to refer to scripts during the live taping.
Mr. Daily later became a semiregular panelist on the “The Match Game.” He also reprised his role as Colonel Healey — the character was promoted — for two movies based on “Jeannie.” From 2006 until 2009, while he lived in Albuquerque, he became a guest host on the radio station KBQI.
Mr. Daily was born on Aug. 30, 1927, in Des Moines and later moved to Chicago. He turned to comedy to make up for his dyslexia, Mr. Lundquist said.
He learned to play the bass and became a professional musician. He was drafted in the United States Army and served in the Korean War.
He married three times, Mr. Lundquist said, and had two children from his first marriage: a son, J. Patrick, and a daughter, Kimberly, who has died. He had another daughter, Becca, from his second marriage.
Mr. Lundquist said Mr. Daily would tell him often, “You can actually choose to be happy,” a philosophy he lived by.
