His Infowars business under legal threat after he spent years spreading lies about the Sandy Hook shooting, Mr. Jones says he’s the victim of a media conspiracy.
In our article, “Conspiracy Theories Made Alex Jones Very Rich. They May Bring Him Down,” my colleague Emily Steel and I shed light on Alex Jones’s Infowars business.
I met Mr. Jones in family court in Austin, Tex., on Aug. 3, after a custody hearing with his ex-wife, Kelly Jones.
In the hallway outside the courtroom, Mr. Jones told me he blamed the mainstream news media for bringing him within “minutes of losing my kids.” He then did what few actually believed he would: He agreed to an interview with The New York Times.
Mr. Jones is a radio and online fabulist who has made millions by parlaying bogus “reports” of imminent civil war, government enslavement and mind control into sales of fish oil, “emergency survival foods” and Infowars-branded AR-15 components that purchasers can use to build a military-style rifle not readily traceable by federal authorities.
He urges fans to investigate what he calls “false flags,” supposed events staged by powerful institutions as a pretext for curbing individual freedoms. His jingoistic calls to action sound like patriotism but can play out like vigilantism.
My reporting began in April, covering three defamation lawsuits filed against Infowars by the families of victims of the 2012 mass shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Conn., that killed 20 children and six adults. Starting on Dec. 14 of that year, the day of the shooting, Mr. Jones spread false claims that the tragedy was a hoax and the relatives were actors in a conspiracy staged by “gun grabbers.” Such claims exposed the families to a horrifying array of threats and abuse. Now they seek truth and, potentially, tens of millions of dollars in damages.
Mr. Jones was adamant that we not reveal the location of his business. En route, the cabdriver, a former U.P.S. deliveryman, guessed the destination and shared a story about how odd it was to bring packages to Infowars, where staff didn’t acknowledge the name of the business on the phone and he had to go through a serpentine process to make a drop.
When I entered, Mr. Jones was holding a printout of a story I had written. The article included his demand, in court documents, for more than $100,000 in court costs from the parents of Noah Pozner, who died at Sandy Hook.
Mr. Jones was wearing a starched, white, too-snug monogrammed shirt and one of his Rolex watches (more on that later).
He recited a rasping medley of plots by globalists, “Chi-coms,” Muslims, Robert Mueller, Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama and his newest villains: social media companies whose actions are eating into his business.
“Humanity will be obsolete by 2050. This is the consensus at Google and Facebook and Twitter,” he said. “We’re going to merge with machines and become gods, but first we’ve got to reduce the world population 90 percent.” I wondered aloud what the Jones family dinner table conversation must be like.
Mr. Jones seemed rattled. He stammered and rushed around a cluttered conference room on whose whiteboard was a list of stunts — “moving in to Starbucks,” “setting up a safe space” — that the Infowars team could perform to trigger liberals.
Throughout the interview, he’d shake his fist, pause, sigh dramatically, and do imitations, including of my “saucer eyes” as I listened to his repetitive, bigoted and mind-bending claims.
Mr. Jones advances plotlines using would-be spy lingo like “intel,” going “operational,” and “C.I.A. mis-info.” He calls employees on his show “reporters.” The survival of his business now depends on whether he can successfully claim First Amendment protection for theories that real reporting would swiftly debunk.
I asked Mr. Jones whether he, as a father, accepted responsibility for what the Sandy Hook families have endured. He got angry.
In Connecticut, Mr. Heslin, hounded by Sandy Hook “hoaxers,” was struggling to restart his life, too. Years after the shooting, he still couldn’t bring himself to take down the bare Christmas tree that he and his 6-year-old son, Jesse Lewis, had planned to decorate before the child was killed.
During our reporting, Mr. Jones maligned Emily and me by name on his broadcasts, making misogynist comments and false claims about our work, including that we were stalking him and threatening his associates. He left weird voice mail messages, texts and photos on my cellphone. In a discussion of his accusations against me among Mr. Jones’s fans on a non-Infowars Facebook page, a commenter named “Scott” suggested that I be mutilated, raped and set on fire.
Journalists are accustomed to anonymous threats online. But the families of murdered children are not.
