LOS ANGELES — Two events of extraordinary importance hover over Kenley Jansen. One would be the crowning achievement of his unlikely major league career. The other would save his life.
Jansen, the star closer for the Los Angeles Dodgers, watched the Houston Astros celebrate here last November after Game 7 of the World Series. This time, as the Dodgers pursue their sixth consecutive National League West title, Jansen wants desperately to do what they did. His teammates adore him for the way he cares.
The Dodgers nearly fell apart without Jansen last month, when he missed 10 days because of an irregular heartbeat. They failed repeatedly to close out games, and then Jansen himself struggled, losing twice and blowing a save. He knows he needs heart surgery after the season, repeating a procedure he underwent seven years ago. The magnitude of it could weigh on him, if he let it.
Jansen turns 31 on the final day of the regular season. The Dodgers expect to have their playoff spot secured by then, and they took another emphatic step on Tuesday. One night after blowing out the Colorado Rockies to move into first place, the Dodgers prevailed in 10 innings, 3-2, when Chris Taylor homered into the left-field pavilion off Adam Ottavino.
With a victory on Wednesday, the Dodgers — who won the division by 11 games last season — would sweep the Rockies and open up a two-and-a-half-game lead, which would be their largest of the year. They have won six of their last seven games and 17 of their last 24, peaking at just the right time.
When Jansen is at his best, everything else settles more easily into place. The Dodgers have moved starter Kenta Maeda into the bullpen, where he flourished last fall, and have reason to trust the journeyman right-hander Dylan Floro, who has not allowed a run in almost six weeks. Maeda and Floro faced five batters on Tuesday and struck them all out.
The Dodgers command attention for their offensive flexibility; Roberts deployed 13 different starting position players in the first two games of this series. But their bullpen — which also includes starter Alex Wood, who shifted there this week, and Scott Alexander, among others — could now be an underrated strength.
For Jansen — a 6-foot-5, 275-pound former minor league catcher — the outs on Tuesday let him know he is almost back to normal.
After giving up an opposite-field single to Gerardo Parra, he noticed that Chris Iannetta was trying to flick his signature cutter into right field. So he struck him out on a two-seamer, a pitch that veers the other way. Then came a popout and a broken-bat groundout, precisely the kind of feeble contact the cutter is meant to induce.
Jansen spoke in the clubhouse, where a version of the California state flag hangs above his locker.  Jansen is at home here, with an organization that signed him from his native Curaçao at age 17, and re-signed him two winters ago for five years and $80 million.
Jansen had to miss the team’s series this month in Denver, where he experienced the irregular heartbeat both in August and in 2011. He stayed at home, away from the thin air, spending time with his family and watching the games on TV. It felt weird, he said, but it also raised the question: If it is unsafe for Jansen to play in Denver right now, should he really be playing anywhere?
Jansen, for his part, said he was initially concerned about missing the season, but trusts his doctor. He takes pills every morning and every night, but does not live in fear.
One of those places is the operating table, and as scary as it sounds, he has been there before. He has never been on the mound at the end of the World Series. He does not want to miss this chance.
