WASHINGTON — At his confirmation hearings this month, Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh singled out a 1992 Supreme Court decision, saying it was central to any discussion of the power of precedent. But at the Supreme Court itself, the decision has gone missing.
The decision, Planned Parenthood v. Casey, reaffirmed Roe v. Wade, the 1973 landmark that established a constitutional right to abortion. But Casey did more than that. It included a detailed framework for what courts must consider when they are asked to overrule a precedent.
The Casey decision was “precedent on precedent,” Judge Kavanaugh said at the hearings. He used that phrase a lot.
So you might have thought that the Supreme Court would have discussed or at least cited Casey before overruling major precedents. But in a 5-to-4 decision in June that overturned a 41-year-old decision about public unions, Casey went unmentioned — an absence that offered a glimpse of one possible path to overturning Roe.
Justin Driver, a law professor at the University of Chicago, said the omission was telling.
In a second June decision overruling a precedent, this one on whether internet retailers must collect sales taxes, there was also no mention of Casey.
There was nothing unusual about Judge Kavanaugh’s understanding of Casey. Earlier nominees have also said that Casey is a key decision about when precedents may be overruled.
And it mostly tracked the factors discussed in Casey: Was the challenged decision unworkable as a practical matter? Had people come to rely on it? Had the facts the decision was based on changed? Would overruling the decision harm the Supreme Court’s legitimacy?
But, even as Justice Alito ignored a leading precedent on precedent, he seemed to introduce a new and destabilizing element to the analysis.
The challenged 1977 decision, Abood v. Detroit Board of Education, had drawn a line between two sorts of payments from government workers to unions. Workers had a First Amendment right not to pay for a union’s political activities, the Abood decision said. But they could be required to pay so-called agency fees for things like collective bargaining.
Justice Alito concluded that both kinds of compelled payments violated the First Amendment, and that Abood had to be overruled.
That last point was the most interesting one. Justice Alito was right to say that the Supreme Court had expressed hostility to Abood in two earlier opinions, both written, as it happened, by Justice Alito. But there was a circular quality to this element of the analysis. In dissent, Justice Elena Kagan called it bootstrapping.
“Don’t like a decision?” Justice Kagan asked. “Just throw some gratuitous criticisms into a couple of opinions and a few years later point to them as ‘special justifications’ ” for overruling a precedent.
Randy J. Kozel, a law professor at Notre Dame and the author of “Settled Versus Right: A Theory of Precedent,” said the question of how much weight to place on earlier critiques of a challenged precedent was a difficult one.
“The court has occasionally said that it is more inclined to take a fresh look at precedents that have sparked criticism,” Professor Kozel said. But he added that Justice Kagan had a point.
In a new essay, Richard M. Re, a law professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, said the court’s approach in the public unions case was an example of what he called the “doctrine of one last chance.” Before the Supreme Court takes a major step, he said, it gives signals that offer the affected parties and the nation time to respond, prepare and adjust.
Something similar happened before the court’s 2010 decision in Citizens United, which amplified the role of money in politics, and its 2013 decision in Shelby County v. Holder, which effectively struck down the heart of the Voting Rights Act.
There has been no similar signal in a majority opinion in the context of abortion. To the contrary, the Supreme Court reaffirmed Roe and Casey as recently as 2016.
But Justice Alito’s approach in the case on public unions, coupled with his failure to cite Casey, suggested a road map to an eventual decision overruling Roe. It would start with harsh criticism in a majority opinion or two, and it would end with a decision overruling Roe that relied on the earlier criticism as proof that it had been undermined.