The backdrop to these complaints was a culture of hard partying that permeated certain quarters of high school and college life in the 1980s, when binge drinking among teenagers had reached record levels. No evidence has emerged to indicate that the episodes of drinking ascribed to Judge Kavanaugh back then carried forward into his professional or family life, or that the handful of F.B.I. background checks he has faced in his official Washington career unearthed any red flags about his drinking as an adult.
But it is his high school and undergraduate years that have proved to be a mine field during his Supreme Court confirmation process, and questions about drinking during that period are expected to come up when he testifies before the Senate Judiciary Committee on Thursday. Judge Kavanaugh himself has provided grist for this line of inquiry through his wistful references to youthful drinking in yearbook entries and speeches over the years, though he has said he never drank so much that he blacked out or could not remember events.
While his recollections are of harmless partying, interviews with his former classmates turned up less sanguine memories of Judge Kavanaugh and alcohol. While some found Judge Kavanaugh’s college drinking unexceptional, nearly a dozen others said they recalled his indulging in heavy drinking, with some characterizing it as outside the norms of college life. James Roche, a Silicon Valley entrepreneur who roomed with Judge Kavanaugh their freshman year at Yale, described him as “frequently unusually drunk” and someone who could become “belligerent and mean” when he drank.
Another former classmate, Dr. Elizabeth Swisher, now a gynecologic oncologist in Seattle, said it would be “a lie” to say that he “never had a blackout” from drinking in college.
“I saw him very drunk many times and there is no way he remembers everything about every night,” she said.
Several Yale classmates recounted an incident during Judge Kavanaugh’s senior year: After a bout of drinking, they said, he tried to break into the enclosed back of a pickup truck belonging to one of them, and later refused to apologize or repair the damage.
The allegations of sexual misconduct by Judge Brett M. Kavanaugh from his time in high school, above, and college share a theme: heavy drinking.
Friends and colleagues who have known Judge Kavanaugh in his post-college years said he drank beer socially, but none could recall seeing him drunk. The judge enjoys beer — Bud Light is a favorite, one friend said — but never has more than two or three in a night, they said.
She cautioned against the attitude that heavy drinking is “no big deal” and that “boys will be boys.” Excessive drinking is closely tied to incidents of sexual assault, she said, and “that’s why there’s so much concern about college drinking.” She noted that she was not commenting on any accusations against Judge Kavanaugh.
Judge Kavanaugh’s own comments over the years leave little doubt that heavy drinking was a feature of his youth. On his high school yearbook page from 1983, he labeled himself the Keg City Club treasurer, noting “100 Kegs or Bust,” and the “biggest contributor” to Beach Week Ralph Club, apparently a reference to throwing up.
Another time, he said, he was at a class banquet during his final year, where he had “more than a few beers” beforehand, and a drunk friend fell and broke a table before getting up and being refused any more drinks by the bartender.
“I actually still possess a photo of him sprawled on the floor on top of the table,” Judge Kavanaugh said.
While an undergrad at Yale, Judge Kavanaugh joined two organizations with reputations for hard partying. One was Delta Kappa Epsilon, a fraternity that several former Yale students described as a magnet for hard-drinking athletes who liked to party and pull pranks. DKE members marched around campus with women’s underwear hanging from poles, and would print T-shirts for a drinking competition called Tang that featured “beer- and sex-inspired witticisms,” according to the Yale student newspaper. Judge Kavanaugh also joined Truth and Courage, a secret society for seniors known largely as a drinking club.
But it was during a night of drinking with a group of students in a dorm freshman year that, Ms. Ramirez claims, Judge Kavanaugh took out his penis and pushed it toward her face. He adamantly denies it, and no other firsthand witnesses have corroborated her assertion that it was him.
Earlier, at a party in Montgomery County, Md., when Judge Kavanaugh was 17 and Dr. Blasey about 15, she says she was corralled into a bedroom while on her way to an upstairs bathroom. A drunken Judge Kavanaugh pushed her onto a bed and clumsily tried to pull her clothes off, she alleges, while his friend Mark Judge, also intoxicated, locked the door and turned up the music.
Dr. Blasey said she managed to get away when Mr. Judge, laughing, jumped onto the bed, sending all three teenagers tumbling to the floor. Judge Kavanaugh denies assaulting Dr. Blasey or even being at the party in question, and Mr. Judge has said he has “no recollection” of the alleged incident.
Mr. Judge wrote a memoir of his own experiences with alcohol while at Georgetown Prep, “Wasted: Tales of a Gen X Drunk,” in which he described an environment of binge drinking and blackouts. The book refers to a “Bart O’Kavanaugh” who “puked in someone’s car” and “passed out on his way back from a party.” Mr. Judge did not respond to requests for comment.
“That’s been a good thing for all of us,” he said.