Mary Boone in 2016. Lawyers for the art dealer cited the trauma of an impoverished childhood in a court filing that seeks to help her avoid prison for tax evasion.
Mary Boone, a veteran gallerist who has been a fixture in the New York art world for decades, pleaded guilty Wednesday to filing false federal income tax returns, law enforcement officials said.
The Mary Boone Gallery’s 2012 tax forms reported a false business loss for the previous year of about $52,000 although the gallery actually made a profit in 2011 of about $3.7 million, according to documents filed by the United States attorney’s office.
Ms. Boone used business funds to pay for more than $1.6 million in personal expenses, including remodeling a Manhattan apartment, and then falsely claimed those personal expenses as business deductions, prosecutors said. They added that she failed to report on her personal tax forms her profit from the gallery, instead using the bogus losses to offset what she had declared as her personal income.
The charges and guilty plea constituted a jarring and perhaps humbling turn of events for Ms. Boone, who over four decades running one of New York City’s premier galleries has often courted attention and sometimes seemed to relish controversy.
Ms. Boone opened her gallery in SoHo in 1977 and rose to prominence while showing the work of artists like Julian Schnabel, David Salle, Jean-Michel Basquiat and Ross Bleckner. That male-dominated lineup drew criticism from some, including the Guerrilla Girls, an activist feminist art collective who plastered SoHo with posters denouncing Ms. Boone. In 1987, the Boone gallery began representing its first woman, Barbara Kruger.
In 1999, Ms. Boone was arrested after the police were told that she was offering gallery visitors live ammunition as mementos of a one-man show by the sculptor Tom Sachs. The police seized the cartridges and a sculpture consisting of four shotguns and two pistols.
After a night in jail, Ms. Boone appeared before a judge wearing a sleeveless orange dress and high-heels, and told reporters that her arrest was “an outrageous attack” on artists’ rights. The charges against her were eventually dropped.
Over the years Ms. Boone, a flamboyant figure, whose assistants sometimes referred to her as “Scary Spice,” remained a constant in the ever-changing art world. In 1996 she moved her gallery from SoHo to Fifth Avenue and 57th Street. Four years later she opened a space in Chelsea. And she continued to champion the work of young painters and organize shows that drew respectful reviews.
On Wednesday Ms. Boone pleaded guilty to two counts of filing a false federal income tax return, each of which carries a maximum sentence of three years in prison. She is scheduled to be sentenced in January.
Prosecutors said that she agreed to pay restitution to the Internal Revenue Service in the amount of at least $3 million, which represents the additional tax due and owing as a result of her filing of false individual and corporate income tax returns for the calendar years 2009, 2010, and 2011.