For months, Mayor Bill de Blasio has ducked questions about whom he would endorse in the Democratic primary for governor. Would he back Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo, with whom he has carried on a bitter feud — or Cynthia Nixon, the actress who was an early supporter of his mayoral campaign and is a close friend?
On Saturday, he finally gave an answer: neither.
Translation: Mr. de Blasio chose to play it safe. Had he endorsed his friend, Ms. Nixon, it could have further exacerbated his vitriolic rivalry with Mr. Cuomo. In contrast, if he were to endorse Mr. Cuomo, as he did four years ago, he would expose himself to criticism that he was cravenly currying favor with the man he has called an obstacle to progress on many issues — and it could seem a betrayal of his progressive values.
But his caution in making no endorsement at home belies his ambitious positioning as a national progressive leader; he recently created a political action committee, Fairness PAC, to support his national political activities. The PAC has raised more than $71,000 so far, according to campaign finance reports filed with the New York State Board of Elections.
Mr. de Blasio also flew to Wisconsin last month to campaign for Senator Tammy Baldwin, a Democrat running for re-election, and Randy Bryce, another Democratic candidate running for Congress in the district of Paul Ryan, the Republican speaker of the House, who is retiring.
Although he did not make an endorsement for governor, his statement on Saturday praised Ms. Nixon — saying that they “stood shoulder to shoulder” and that her campaign had “created real momentum for reform.” Mr. Cuomo received less effusive treatment: Despite philosophical differences with the governor, Mr. de Blasio wrote, Mr. Cuomo “deserves credit” for passing initiatives like a $15 minimum wage and paid family leave.
Some of Ms. Nixon’s progressive backers said that Mr. de Blasio’s endorsement was not wanted anyway.
In a statement earlier in the week, Ms. Nixon said that she “never asked” Mr. de Blasio for an endorsement and was not seeking it.
After months of postponing any endorsement, Mr. de Blasio had promised on Tuesday to make an announcement about any endorsements by the end of the week. But on Friday, speaking on WNYC, he punted to the weekend.
Before Saturday, Mr. de Blasio had endorsed only a few candidates, including Jessica Ramos in Queens and Zellnor Myrie in Brooklyn. Both are running for State Senate against Democrats who belonged to a breakaway group that caucused with Senate Republicans.
He also quietly endorsed State Senator Martin M. Dilan, who is running for re-election in a district in Brooklyn against Julia Salazar, a newcomer whose campaign has recently been dogged by inconsistencies in her background. Mr. de Blasio has said that he made the endorsement because Mr. Dilan is a close friend.
With a post on Twitter shortly before 4 p.m. on Saturday, Mr. de Blasio endorsed Robert Jackson, of Manhattan, for State Senate.
On Thursday, Mr. de Blasio’s PAC sent an email declaring his support for Mr. Myrie and Ms. Ramos, and asked people to volunteer for their campaigns.
In addition, the PAC reported making a $7,000 donation to Ms. Ramos. It also made a $7,000 donation to another Democratic State Senate candidate, Robert Jackson, who is running in Manhattan against Marisol Alcantara, another former member of the breakaway Democratic group. On Friday, Mr. de Blasio said that, despite the donation, he has not decided whether to openly endorse Mr. Jackson.
Political endorsements have been problematic for Mr. de Blasio since he became mayor in 2014. Later that year, he backed a group of Democratic State Senate candidates, who all lost. That won him the abiding enmity of Senate Republicans, and led to a series of fund-raising investigations that tainted his first term in office.
In 2016, Mr. de Blasio spent months hemming and hawing about whether to endorse Hillary Clinton for president — and by the time he finally did, all it earned him was the candidate’s ire for taking so long.
More recently, he endorsed Representative Joseph Crowley for re-election to the House — only to have Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez unseat him in an upset that turned her into a progressive darling, and raised questions about why Mr. de Blasio had backed an establishment stalwart and failed to see voters’ desire for change.