In SoHo, Thompson Chemists has served a loyal clientele of artists and musicians for 25 years, becoming much more than a pharmacy.
Twice a month, usually on a Wednesday, there’s bluegrass music at my drugstore. At Thompson Chemists, around 7:00 in the evening, Sheriff Bob Seidenberg — musician and record producer — and his band set up alongside the Advil, Pepto-Bismol, Italian toothpaste and French shampoo. The quartet swings on “Me and Bobby McGee.” Dozens of locals crowd in, and there’s plenty of foot tapping and some baby bouncing.
This has been SoHo’s drugstore for 25 years, or its “alchemists” as the owners, Gary and Jolie Aloney, prefer to call it. And it is magic, a quintessential New York neighborhood drugstore. On hot days, Jolie gives the FedEx guy a cold Coke. Rego, the large Aloney mutt, lies around on the floor, desirous of attention.
“I come for the atmosphere,” says the customer Linda Milhorne, who goes by “Squirrelly.” A pretty, fine-boned blonde who works in marketing and high-end design resale, she’s been a regular at Thompson Chemists since she arrived in SoHo 20 years ago. It puts her in mind of her small-town childhood — she’s from Oak Ridge, Tennessee. “I come for toothpaste, for prescriptions, I come to cry, to laugh, for a glass of champagne. They’re like family,” she says.
Gary Aloney was born in Briarwood, Queens, to Israeli parents. He graduated from the LIU School of Pharmacy, and he met Jolie at a party on the Upper East Side, where she was raised. He was impressed. He borrowed his mother’s car and he took her to 150 Wooster, a now long-gone but very hot SoHo restaurant. The neighborhood was clearly in their stars. They married, had three children and Gary worked as a pharmacist in Greenwich Village. Twenty-five years ago they saw a “for rent” sign on Thompson Street, just below Houston. With Gary’s uncle, a construction guy, they put the shop together.
Even today, we cling to our independent drugstores as to a life-raft in a grim alien sea of chain stores. My friend James shops only at NuCare Pharmacy in Chelsea. “The chain stores smell like rancid Halloween candy,” he says. Then there is Bigelow’s, the great Greenwich Village drugstore, or apothecary, a word that implies a certain elevation, a veneration for fancy toiletries, that is perhaps more Santa Maria Novella than Walgreens; a certain venerable age.
