The SHSAT, a grueling one-day exam, is considered a golden ticket into one of New York City’s eight prestigious schools, if you score high enough. But the test is not perfect and has been the subject of public debate over its role in school segregation.
The experience of taking the Specialized High Schools Admissions Test — the sole means of getting into eight elite public schools in New York City — is one that students aren’t likely to forget. For some, it meant months or years of demanding test prep courses and practice drills. For others, it meant just showing up on the day of the exam — because, well, everyone else was taking it.
We asked readers to share their experience with the exam and if they would change the admission process, which has been criticized for not being representative of the overall student population in the city’s school system. The schools, like Stuyvesant High School and the Bronx High School of Science, have a low number of black and Hispanic students and an overrepresentation of white and Asian students.
What we learned from the more than 700 responses we received was that the experiences and memories were as varied as the backgrounds of the students who took the test. However, there was one consistent theme — regardless of one’s score: Students took the test for the opportunity for a brighter future.
With regard to changing the admissions process, the answers were split. Most readers did acknowledge there was a diversity problem at the schools, but few offered ways to solve it. As a new school year begins on Wednesday, we offer a selection of past stories and opinions about what should happen in the future.
I took the Specialized High School exam in 2004 and ultimately gained admission to the Bronx High School of Science. Like many Asians, I went to a prep school that my parents paid $1,600 for a summer session. For that summer, I wanted to be practically anywhere else but that classroom.
Eventually over the first and second week of taking prep courses, something happened; people took mock exams and compared scores, sparking a competitive drive even though there were no prizes to be had at the end. That’s an attitude that carried forward into my time at Bronx Science; that no matter how lazy my initial inclination may be, there was a social pressure to succeed, that at times felt like a need to succeed.
Having parents and teachers who want you to succeed is highly important, but having peers who are driven to succeed is what really set the experience apart. I personally believe that drive needs to be instilled early, and that may be part of why student screening has trickled down from high school to middle school.
I was an “honors track” student in middle school and my entire class had been planning on taking the SHSAT exam since the beginning of seventh grade. My only motivation in taking it myself was to fit in with my peers. I had taken a class offered at my school to prepare, but I did little else and had no private tutoring.
After being accepted to my top specialized high school, I spent four years tutoring middle school students in preparation for the exam, and have since had to grapple with my own role in perpetuating the racial and income inequality in these schools as a low-income student myself.
While I likely would not have been admitted if anything other than my score was considered, I believe there are countless students who show promise but are disadvantaged by the current structure of admissions and are kept out of opportunities that could lead to life-changing access to resources.
— Ben Sorkin, 19, Cambridge, Mass.
I’m African-American. My parents met at Bronx High School of Science and my older brother went to Stuyvesant, so I’m not sure that I ever really anticipated not going to one of the specialized high schools. It’s been almost 30 years since I took the test and can’t quite remember the test itself, but I came from a pretty academically strong junior high school.
My time at Brooklyn Tech (Class of ’95) created lifelong friendships, reinforced my hunger for learning and exposed me to a great degree of diversity. What changed?
While it is likely true that preparatory programs existed in the early ’90s, I don’t recall this being a huge focal area. I don’t remember seeing the same number of for-fee programs or study guides available. Perhaps that ultimately made for more balanced competition, with everyone approaching the test more equally prepared.
Today, there are more levers to pull to prepare for the test, and everyone isn’t equally aware of, or able to access, these same preparatory tools. Gone are the days of young impressionable eighth grade kids just waking up on a Saturday morning and walking into a big intimidating building to take the same test with limited or no preparation. That combined with varying degrees of middle school quality have certainly influenced the changes that we see today.
I took the exam when I was an eighth-grader back in 1957. I was an underachiever in P.S. 241 in Brooklyn and my teacher and principal told my parents that “he shouldn’t bother” and “it would be a waste of time,” to take the admissions test. I insisted that I wanted to try. Lo and behold, I was accepted. I spent four years at Stuyvesant.
While I can’t say that I loved the long subway commute, I did enjoy the Stuyvesant experience. In addition to the high-level standard academic Regents courses, there were many interesting electives, like automotive and practical physics, mechanical engineering and drawing, that I found challenging and enjoyable.
All in all, I am very happy to be a Stuyvesant alum and I am glad to be in the shadow of those whose brain power far exceeded my own. I believe that continued admission on the basis of a single test that is colorblind and agnostic on background, race, religion and economic status is the fairest way to go.
I entered Stuyvesant in 1967. Back then, there were no test prep books, no prep courses, no prep tutors. I just showed up at the test center at the appointed time and took the exam, cold. I was 14, and it was by far the hardest and longest test I’d taken. To my surprise, I made the cut, and I decided to go to Stuyvesant.
From the start, I was impressed by the intelligence of my classmates. They kept me on my toes — the atmosphere was very competitive — and I got a great education there. Junior high grades, even in science classes, are highly subjective; the admission test weeds out the dummies and enables smart students to flourish. Keep it!
 They’ll no longer be so special and everyone will know it.
When the test day came, I panicked and almost didn’t take the test. Despite all my prep, I felt like I wasn’t ready. My father physically had to put me in the car and I remember not being able to breathe well. I walked in with a male cousin of mine, who was the same age, and I sat behind him. I remember this because we were the only brown kids in a room full of white and Asian middle schoolers.
I had initially put Bronx Science as my top choice and a few moments before the test was over, switched it out with Stuyvesant. Months later, I was stunned when I was accepted to Stuyvesant.
I was one of the few kids of Caribbean descent in Stuyvesant and I knew plenty of people who deserved to be there but didn’t test well or didn’t even know about the test.
The fact that my mother didn’t want me to go because she genuinely didn’t know what the specialized high school test was or what a specialized high school was, is indicative of the larger problem at hand — that there isn’t enough outreach done in these communities that they want to pull “diverse” students from, and that the public and elementary schools serving these communities are underfunded and woefully under-prepare students for high school, much less a specialized one.
When I heard that the specialized high schools were the only high schools that don’t look at state test scores and other grades or résumés, I felt relieved, because my grades are definitely not the best. I felt that it was a way to help me forget the big mistakes that I made in the past, like handing in late assignments and almost failing classes.
I took this chance and studied as hard as I could, and since my family couldn’t afford tutoring, I borrowed a test prep book from the library, because I wasn’t going to complain about how disadvantaged I was and let this opportunity slip.
I ended up getting an offer from Brooklyn Tech. I couldn’t be more grateful and thankful for the opportunity the test has given me to get an offer in one of the best high schools in the city.
I am a Haitian-American student and I came from a predominantly black middle school that offered SHSAT prep. However, it was not very good. We simply did questions from the book that specialized high schools provided. I also studied on my own for the exam, but clearly this was not enough. When I got my score back, I received a 472 when the cut off was 480, I believe. I was devastated.
I was a student who got a 95+ average almost every semester and I was considered one of the “smart” kids in my school. But I was not able to get into my dream school, Brooklyn Technical High School, because of this one exam. I didn’t feel that this one score reflected my work ethic nor did it reflect the types of grades that I would receive in high school.
When I entered high school, another predominantly black institution, I graduated as the valedictorian with a 98 average, an advanced Regents diploma, and four AP classes. But I believe, I could have done better if I had the opportunity to go to Brooklyn Tech where there were more opportunities to take college-level courses because my school lacked in this area.
Although I am happy with where I am now — I’m a second-year college student with a 4.0 G.P.A. on my way to becoming a physician in a seven-year B.S./M.D. program — it is still disappointing that there are students of color who are not able to reach their full potential because of a single exam, or a single score.
There are many factors that make a great and successful student, and the SHSAT is not one of them.
Like all my white middle-class peers, I took the SHSAT in 2001 when I was applying to high school. I didn’t even get into Brooklyn Tech. My friends either went to a specialized school or to private school. I went to an unscreened public high school.
What I learned in high school has become much more valuable to me than anything I could have learned at a screened school. I learned about segregation. I learned about poverty. I learned empathy and cross-cultural collaboration. I learned to see racism. I saw models of adults committed to changing institutionalized systems that impacted the lives of my peers in school. It completely changed who I am.
Now I am a special-education teacher at an unscreened school on the street I grew up on. Academic content can be learned at any point, but sharing an education with young people from every part of the New York develops an understanding and community that can deeply affect our lives and the future of our city.
