WASHINGTON — A secretive letter shared with senators and federal investigators by the senior Democrat on the Senate Judiciary Committee charges that a teenage Brett M. Kavanaugh and a male friend trapped a teenage girl in a bedroom during a party and tried to assault her, according to three people familiar with the contents of the letter.
The letter says that Mr. Kavanaugh, then a student at Georgetown Preparatory School in suburban Washington and now President Trump’s Supreme Court nominee, had been drinking at a social gathering when he and the male friend took the teenage girl into a bedroom. The door was locked, and she was thrown onto the bed. Mr. Kavanaugh then got on top of the teenager and put a hand over her mouth, as the music was turned up, according to the account.
But the young woman was able to extricate herself and leave the room before anything else occurred, the letter says.
The woman says she considered the episode an assault. She has declined to be publicly identified, and she asked Senator Dianne Feinstein of California, the top Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, not to publicize the letter.
In a statement shared by the White House, Mr. Kavanaugh said the charges were false.
The friend who is said to have participated, Mark Judge, also denied the episode ever happened.
“I never saw anything like what was described,” he said in an interview after being informed that he was named in the letter.
The episode took place more than 30 years ago, when all three individuals involved were minors. The New York Times has not seen the letter, but its contents were described by the three people.
With speculation about the letter’s contents circulating this week, Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, the Republican chairman of the Judiciary Committee, released a different letter on Friday, sent to him and Ms. Feinstein and signed by 65 women who say they knew Judge Kavanaugh while in high school.
Mr. Grassley was still planning to move ahead with Mr. Kavanaugh’s confirmation. The Judiciary Committee is scheduled to hold a key vote to advance the nomination next Thursday, and Republican leaders hope to hold a final vote of the full Senate before the end of September to allow Mr. Kavanaugh to be seated before the start of the Supreme Court’s fall term next month. Mr. Grassley’s aides said that Mr. Kavanaugh had been the subject of six F.B.I. background checks since 1993, and none had turned up anything like the episode in question.
It was not immediately clear how, if at all, the charges would influence senators who must decide whether to give Mr. Kavanaugh a lifetime appointment to the court. Only a small group of moderate senators remain publicly undecided about their votes, and objections from either one of two undecided Republicans, Senators Susan Collins of Maine and Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, could thwart confirmation.
Ms. Collins spent an hour on the phone with Mr. Kavanaugh on Friday, shortly after details of the letter were first published. The call had been scheduled for days, and neither the White House nor Ms. Collins’s office would disclose what was discussed.
The White House and outside pro-Kavanaugh groups continued to accuse Democrats of playing dirty, withholding mysterious information until the eve of Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation in a last-ditch effort to derail a nominee they have always opposed.
The woman’s letter first arrived on Capitol Hill in July, initially to the office of Representative Anna Eshoo, Democrat of California. It was quickly shared with Ms. Feinstein, as well, who from her senior position on the Judiciary Committee would lead Democratic questioning of Judge Kavanaugh.
But Ms. Feinstein was torn by competing concerns. The woman made clear that though she had shared the information because she felt it could be relevant to Senate consideration of Judge Kavanaugh, she did not want to come forward or make the accusations public.
For weeks, the letter and its contents were closely limited to a tight circle of aides. Ms. Feinstein chose not to raise the matter either publicly or privately during hourslong questioning of Judge Kavanaugh by senators last week, or in written questions sent to the nominee afterward and she did not initially share it with colleagues, including Mr. Grassley.
By the time Judge Kavanaugh was on the witness stand, though, its existence had become an open secret on Capitol Hill, with speculation circling among reporters, lawmakers and congressional aides about its contents. The Intercept first reported its existence Wednesday evening.
Under pressure from other Democratic senators, who had been fighting a pitched battle against Judge Kavanaugh for weeks — largely over access to documents from his years in the George W. Bush White House — Ms. Feinstein called a meeting late Wednesday to share with the lawmakers the letter’s contents but not the letter itself.
Several of those senators advised Ms. Feinstein to at least share the letter with law enforcement authorities. On Thursday, she announced in a cryptic statement that she had sent “information from an individual concerning the nomination of Brett Kavanaugh to the Supreme Court” to the authorities, but only after redacting the woman’s name from the document. Others wanted to take a more aggressive tack and push what they saw as serious accusations into public view, despite the woman’s concerns, Senate officials familiar with the matter said. Ms. Feinstein’s statement appears to have been an attempt to account for both demands.
The F.B.I. has not opened a criminal investigation into the matter, but added the letter to Judge Kavanaugh’s background file. That updated file was in turn shared with the White House on Thursday and then sent to Capitol Hill, where it will be kept in the office of the chairman for review by senators.
Senators themselves had little to say publicly about the accusations on Friday. The new details seemed merely to harden the position of outside groups that have conducted an expensive war over the nominee, with at least one liberal group, NARAL Pro-Choice America, calling for Mr. Kavanaugh to withdraw his nomination.
Carrie Severino, chief counsel and policy director of the Judicial Crisis Network, the conservative group pressing for Judge Kavanaugh’s confirmation, drew the opposite conclusion, insisting there should be no delay in the confirmation process.
“This is nothing more than a last-minute attempt at character assassination,” she said.