Sonny Gray allows home runs less frequently than Chris Sale. He has a higher strikeouts-per-nine-innings ratio than Marcus Stroman. His wins-above-replacement figure is higher than Jose Quintana’s, and his earned run average is lower than those of Yu Darvish, Chris Archer and Justin Verlander.
Although he has not worked enough innings to qualify among the league leaders — he has pitched just 97 innings after beginning the season on the disabled list with a latissimus strain — by just about any measurement, Gray, 27, belongs among the top starting pitchers in the American League.
And he cannot become a free agent until after the 2019 season.
Yet the Yankees acquired him from the Oakland Athletics in exchange for two players coming off major operations and a minor-league infielder who had fallen on their depth chart.
On the eve of Gray’s first start for his new team, scheduled for Thursday night in Cleveland, it appears, on paper anyway, that General Manager Brian Cashman pulled off a heist in acquiring Gray at the July 31 nonwaiver trading deadline.
Cashman parted with pitcher James Kaprielian, who underwent Tommy John surgery in April and will probably not pitch in the major leagues until 2019 at the earliest; outfielder Dustin Fowler, who ruptured his patella tendon in the first inning of his first big-league game in June; and infielder Jorge Mateo, who was no longer ranked as the top prospect in the Yankees’ farm system.
Gray also adds little to the Yankees’ payroll, as he is making $3.575 million this season, and the Yankees will pay only a prorated portion of that figure.
All of which raises questions as to what motivated Billy Beane, the general manager of the A’s and an architect of the “Moneyball” theory of team building, to part with a player of Gray’s caliber, and relative affordability, before he has even priced himself out of Oakland’s limited budget.
Beane certainly got quantity in the deal, which was completed not long before Monday’s trade deadline. Cashman clearly got quality. Beane did not return a call seeking comment, but the Athletics’ willingness to move Gray at this stage of his career — and coming off a July in which he went 3-1 with a 1.48 E.R.A. — raises the question of whether Gray’s injury history was a factor in the decision to let him go.
Gray, who was 6-5 with a 3.43 E.R.A. in 16 starts over all for Oakland this season, was shut down for 10 days in spring training because of the muscle strain, and he did not make his first start until May 2.
Although he pitched seven innings of three-hit, one-run ball against the Miami Marlins on May 24, Gray did not hit his stride until a June 25 start against the White Sox in Chicago. In the six starts beginning with that game, Gray won four of six games and allowed just six earned runs in 39 ⅓ innings.
Thursday will be Gray’s third start against the Indians this season. He turned in his worst outing of the season against them in Cleveland on May 30, allowing seven earned runs in four and two-thirds innings, but bounced back to beat them on July 14 in Oakland, pitching six shutout innings and allowing only two hits. Gray said his wife and 2-year-old son, Gunnar, would meet him in Cleveland for his first start as a Yankee.
