Even as New York’s political leaders talk about a new, higher tax rate for the rich to fix mass transit, they might consider reviving an old revenue source that state lawmakers eliminated 18 years ago, to New York City’s enduring harm. This is the commuter tax, a modest imposition on the paychecks of 811,000 suburbanites who make their living in the city and may reasonably be expected to contribute a little to help keep it running.
That tax was 0.45 percent of a person’s earnings, one-ninth of the top income tax rate that the city imposes on its own residents. It died in 1999 because of political gamesmanship in Albany, not because of any reasoned debate over fiscal policy.
If it were in place today, it would cost a typical commuter, described by budget officials as someone with an income of $84,000, only $378 a year. That’s just a little more than a dollar a day to pay for policing and firefighting — or for subways, if that’s where the city chooses to put the money: services that many suburbanites rely on as much as city dwellers do. The yield for the city would be huge. This year alone, it would have come to $922 million, says the city’s Independent Budget Office, relying on data from the mayor’s budget team.
What happened was Albany at its most thoughtless. There was no vast public outcry at the time to dump the tax. It had long been an accepted, if unloved, burden, created in 1966 under the stewardship of two Republicans, Gov. Nelson Rockefeller and Mayor John Lindsay, to help a city facing tough times. The rate then was 0.25 percent, which was raised to 0.45 percent five years later.
Almost out of nowhere, the tax became caught up in a 1999 race for a State Senate seat in Rockland and Orange Counties. Republicans and Democrats in the Legislature tried to outdo one another as tax cutters — without consulting City Hall, then under Mayor Rudolph Giuliani, about the long-term consequences. Before anyone knew it, the tax was killed.
Resurrection of the tax is highly unlikely at present, especially with 2018 state elections looming. The odds against it are even longer than those that Mayor Bill de Blasio faces with his proposal to pay for subway repairs by taxing the income of the city’s wealthiest more heavily. But bringing back the commuter tax would correct a historical mistake.
