SETTING This house is in Litchfield County, in the northwest corner of Connecticut, a bucolic area of rolling hills with many handsome homes. The center of Norfolk, where there are a few shops, restaurants and a music hall, is about five miles away. The larger, popular town of Great Barrington, Mass., is about 25 miles away, and Manhattan is about 120 miles.
INDOORS This Cape Cod-style house, owned by the interior designer Kara Mann, retains many early details, including wide-plank pine floors, doors with original hardware, windows with antique glass and ceilings with exposed beams. Double front doors open into a hallway with a staircase. The family room is to one side and the living room to the other. Both have wood-burning fireplaces and some paneled walls. Toward the back of the house is a large dining area with an oversized granite fireplace that opens to a library with built-in bookcases. This room connects to a kitchen with a brick floor, Shaker-style cabinets, black marble counters, stainless steel appliances and a sunny sitting area with French doors opening to a patio.
Upstairs, there are two bedrooms, both entered through smaller rooms currently used as sleeping quarters for guests. The main bedrooms share a Jack-and-Jill bathroom. One connects to a dressing area with closets under a sloped ceiling; the other connects to a laundry room.
OUTDOOR SPACE The 6.7-acre lot is reached by a gravel driveway. There are stone walls and manicured lawns near the house with wild fields and forest beyond, as well as a patio along the back of the house. The detached two-car garage has space for a studio above.
SETTING This bungalow-style house is in University Park, a neighborhood near the center of downtown Raleigh, inside the beltline of I-440. North Carolina State University, Meredith College and Cameron Village, an outdoor shopping center dating from 1949 with many shops and restaurants, are all about a mile away.
INDOORS The house was gut renovated and expanded in 2014. The new James Hardie exterior cladding mixes board and batten, shingles and lap siding. Inside, the floors are a mix of new and refinished red oak. The large dining area off the foyer has a wood-burning fireplace and is open to a sunroom and kitchen with custom cabinets, Calacatta gold marble counters and premium stainless steel appliances. Beyond is a living room with another fireplace and built-in bookshelves. A mudroom with built-in storage cubbies is accessible from a side entrance.
The master suite, in an addition at the back of the house, has a sunny bedroom, a large walk-in closet and a bathroom with a double vanity, a walk-in shower with sliding glass door and Carrara marble flooring, counter and wall tile. The three other bedrooms are accessible from the dining area and share one and a half bathrooms and a nook for a washer and dryer.
OUTDOOR SPACE The house sits on a 0.22-acre lot with two old oak trees, some lawn and small gardens. There is a deck on the side of the house, a fenced backyard and a detached storage shed.
SETTING This house is in the Greenland Hills neighborhood, also known as the M Streets, in a conservation district with many Tudor and Craftsman-style homes. Numerous restaurants, stores and the music-focused Granada Theater are a few blocks east, on Greenville Avenue. White Rock Lake, a popular park ringed by a hiking and cycling trail nearly 10 miles long, is about four miles away. The center of Dallas is about five miles south.
INDOORS The arched front door of this stone-and-brick Tudor house opens into a small foyer that leads to a living room with a beamed ceiling, stained glass windows, refinished hardwood floors and a gas fireplace surrounded with decorative tile. One step up through an arched doorway is the dining room. The renovated kitchen has white cabinets, an island, quartzite counters and stainless steel appliances. At the back of the house is a family room with a wall of windows overlooking the pool.
The master bedroom has several closets, one of them walk-in, and an en-suite bathroom updated a few years ago. The second bedroom has built-in bookshelves and French doors to a patio in front of the house. The other bathroom retains its original, distinctive avocado-and-black wall tile and basket-weave tile floor.
OUTDOOR SPACE The 0.18-acre lot has manicured front gardens and a fenced backyard with a stone patio and an in-ground pool with fountains. There is also a detached two-car garage.
