Joseph Bologna, who looked like the quintessential tough guy but couldn’t seem to resist writing and playing sensitive male characters who longed for love and commitment in films like “Lovers and Other Strangers” and “Made for Each Other,” died on Sunday in Duarte, Calif., near Pasadena. He was 82.
His death, at the City of Hope Hospital, was confirmed by his publicist, Dick Guttman. Mr. Bologna learned he had pancreatic cancer three years ago.
The production, in which Ms. Taylor starred, ran only two months, but Mr. Bologna and Ms. Taylor sold the film rights. “Lovers and Other Strangers” the movie (1970) was a box-office hit, earning roughly three times its production cost in North America alone and garnering the couple a shared Oscar nomination (with a co-writer, David Zelag Goodman) for best adapted screenplay.
That bought the Bologna-Taylor team major credibility, which they turned into their next film, “Made for Each Other” (1971), a satire based on their own love story. Mr. Bologna made his screen debut, starring opposite his wife as an Italian-American bachelor who meets a neurotic Jewish actress in an encounter group and does psychological battle with self-esteem issues and a fear of intimacy.
The typecasting took only partial hold, as Mr. Bologna made a film career in varied comedy roles. In “Blame It on Rio” (1984), he starred as a middle-aged adulterer whose teenage daughter had an affair with his best friend, played by Michael Caine. He was a mad scientist in “Transylvania 6-5000” (1985) and Adam Sandler’s father in “Big Daddy” (1999). He and Ms. Taylor continued to make films together, including “Love Is All There Is” (1996), a Romeo and Juliet story about dueling catering families on City Island, in the Bronx.
Mr. Bologna was born on Dec. 30, 1934, in Brooklyn, the son of Anthony and Josephine Bologna.
He met Ms. Taylor while moonlighting as a joke writer for comedians. “We spent most of our courting in Sardi’s,” the theater-district restaurant, he told The Daily News in 1996. They married in 1965, and the reception was broadcast on “The Merv Griffin Show,” on which Ms. Taylor had been a frequent guest. They had a son, Gabriel Bologna, an actor and director. In addition to his wife and son, Mr. Bologna is survived by a daughter, Zizi Bologna; a sister, Barbara Carson; and a grandson.
