Style|Anger Rooms Are All the Rage. Timidly, We Gave One a Whack.
Anger Rooms Are All the Rage. Timidly, We Gave One a Whack.
Smashing things may not seem at first blush to be a winning idea to wrap a business around. Since March, however, nearly 1,500 people have shown up to break housewares, electronics and furniture at the Wrecking Club, two reinforced rooms in the basement of a building in the garment district of Manhattan.
Many of this number are couples looking for something more piquant than the usual date-night fare, said Tom Daly, the Wrecking Club’s proprietor. But rage is not confined to matrimony and other romantic unions, as Mr. Daly has also found.
The Wrecking Club is not the first rage-based enterprise. Last fall, politics drove the business at the Anger Room, which opened in Dallas in 2008. Clients showed up by the hundreds to batter human effigies of Hillary Clinton and Donald J. Trump. Three Trump mannequins and two Clintons were utterly destroyed, according to the owner, Donna Alexander, and had to be replaced.
For those who would rather act out at home, the online marketplace presents an armory’s worth of what are known as therapy tools. Foam anger bats, for example, start at about $10. At the high end, a pair of well-padded, cherry-red canvas, German-made, jumbo encounter bats cost about $210 and look like something the performance artist Leigh Bowery might have designed as a special kind of evening wear.
Finding these materials is one of his biggest challenges. Companies going out of business are an irregular source. Sometimes people donate things, Mr. Daly said, adding that everything smashed at the Wrecking Club is properly recycled.
Mr. Daly is keeping the building’s location a secret (after you sign up for a session online, your confirmation email contains the address): not to protect his landlords, but to maintain the atmosphere of a speakeasy.
Close-toed shoes are required, and long pants and long sleeves suggested. Customers who are visibly drunk or stoned will be turned away and their deposit forfeited. Mr. Daly provides safety goggles, hard hats, work gloves and black nylon smocks.
He seemed surprised when this reporter arrived alone. “It’s just more fun with two,” he said. But inviting a new boyfriend to what surely constitutes end-stage relationship behavior did not appeal (I was not eager to fast-track into Martha and George territory). And breaking crockery seemed too intimate an activity to share with even an old friend.
I ordered a monitor, a large flat-screen TV, a chair and a box of dishes. Mr. Daly said that most customers play music, and I looked to Dina Litovsky, the photographer who had accompanied me to document the proceedings, for assistance. “Metallica, obviously,” she said, and cued up the thrash anthem “Battery” on her phone.
In a corner were a metal bat and a long crowbar. Dina and I were stymied by the heat — the air-conditioning wasn’t working — and our goggles kept fogging up as our eyes stung with sweat. I picked up a bat, approached the TV, and, then, I am ashamed to say, I hit the thing like a girl. Minor crack. James Hetfield of Metallica barked and howled: “Hungry violence seeker, feeding off the weaker.” Really, it was embarrassing. I pined for something more jolly; Blondie’s “Heart of Glass,” say, or that very satisfying Carrie Underwood song in which she crows about demolishing her cheating ex’s car with a bat and a set of keys.
Here’s what I have to report: Hastening an object toward entropy isn’t as easy as you might think. Televisions are extremely hard to destroy, even with a metal bat. Apple monitors are even more durable. Chairs are impossible. And unlike David Bowie, I don’t like the sound of breaking glass; it makes my teeth hurt.  The deep reservoir of rage I was hoping to tap turned out to be a dry creek, drained by time — who can remember the hurts of yore? — and self-consciousness. There would be no primal screaming on West 38th Street that hot summer day. Two people breaking things seems festive; a solo smasher is just weird.
I found a bit of a rhythm, finally, with my bat, and systematically worked my way over the TV screen — pop, pop, pop — until the floor sparkled with black glass. I stifled an urge to ask for a dustpan and broom.
Mr. Daly has learned a thing or two about human nature in the last few months.
