Good morning on this magnificent Monday.
While New York City isn’t in the path of today’s total solar eclipse, we’re still expecting quite the spectacle.
Nearly 72 percent of the sun will be covered by the moon during a partial solar eclipse.
The action will begin at 1:23 p.m., when the moon will begin to pass in front of the sun. The black orb will appear to slowly darken our star until 2:44 p.m., when the maximum portion of the sun will be covered. By 4 p.m., the moon will move on and our skies will return to normal.
You’ll need special eclipse glasses so as to not damage your eyes.
There are also other ways to see the eclipse. You can make a pinhole projector out of paper or cardboard (here’s how), or a spaghetti strainer (with large holes) can be used as a pinhole projector in a pinch, Dr. Faherty said.
Parks. Not only can they offer open views of the sky, Dr. Faherty said, but if you don’t have glasses, they are great places to see the eclipse in the sun’s reflection. Look in the shadows cast from nearby trees, she said. “The small amount of space between the leaves can drop little projected images of the sun, which will all be partial eclipses, on the ground.” Or head to a park with a pond (like Central Park, Prospect Park, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park or Van Cortlandt Park), where you can see the sun reflected in the water.
Rooftop bars. For unobstructed views, check out Hotel Americano in Chelsea, which is hosting a free poolside viewing party, or attend the watch parties at City Vineyard at Pier 26 in Lower Manhattan (free, R.S.V.P. here) or the Lovage rooftop lounge in Midtown, Manhattan ($12). Eclipse glasses will be provided.
Times Square. Wait, hear us out. Some researchers say the eclipse is best experienced in a crowd. This way you can better feel the event’s emotional intensity and connect with strangers.
City watch parties. Our city is hosting plenty of them and many will have eclipse glasses on hand, including the American Museum of Natural History on the Upper West Side; the Intrepid Sea, Air & Space Museum in Midtown; Pioneer Works in Red Hook, Brooklyn; Brooklyn Grange in Fort Greene; and at public libraries like Pelham Bay Library and West Farms Library in the Bronx and the Clinton Hill Library in Brooklyn.
However you choose to experience the eclipse, soak it up. We’re not expecting another one until 2021.
In our effort to capture the energy surrounding today’s celestial event, we want to know: When was the last time you saw this much enthusiasm for an event in New York City? And how was that event and today’s solar eclipse viewing similar? Let us know by emailing |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| Please include your name, age and where you live. We might include your response in a column.
The weather’s on our side today: dazzling blue skies on the docket, with a high near 89.
Thank you for your cooperation, Mother Nature.
• Mets host Diamondbacks, 7:10 p.m. (SNY).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Sept. 1.
The last time a total solar eclipse darkened the city was on January 24, 1925.
The path of totality, in which the sun is entirely blocked, passed through Upper Manhattan above 96th Street, northern Queens and the Bronx.
It was scheduled to arrive in New York at 9:11 a.m., and was 4 seconds late.
Millions of New Yorkers stepped out into the bitter 9-degree cold to watch.
Traffic halted. Courts adjourned. Streetlights turned on. Women fainted. And a blind New Jersey man said his eyesight was restored.
At the time, smoked glass was a popular tool to view the eclipse.
“Those who were lucky enough to be at Lexington Avenue and Forty-second street had the advantage of the eye protection afforded by a screen of smoke that drifted from a chimney across their vision at just the right moment,” reported The Times.
Downtown, Mayor John Francis Hylan watched from City Hall.
