The French director François Truffaut once said that “when a film achieves a certain success, it becomes a sociological event.” Such was the case with Steven Spielberg’s “Close Encounters of the Third Kind,” a movie in which Truffaut himself appeared as a scientist exploring the possibility of extraterrestrial life, and which was initially greeted with something like religious awe.
The pièce de résistance is the open-air screening on Saturday at the base of Devils Tower National Monument in Wyoming. The location is the setting of the film’s finale, and those who make the trek for the screening, which is sponsored by Alamo Drafthouse theaters and the cable station Syfy, will be recapitulating that of its protagonist, Roy Neary (Richard Dreyfuss), a Midwestern telephone lineman redeemed and ultimately beatified by his belief in U.F.O.s.
Like “Star Wars,” which had its premiere approximately half a year before “Close Encounters,” Mr. Spielberg’s film drew on the science-fiction movies and TV shows of its director’s childhood. But where “Star Wars” transported viewers to a distant galaxy, “Close Encounters” brought representatives of that galaxy to Earth — more specifically suburban Middle America. “Close Encounters” revived the Cold War space-invader genre with a difference. Humans had previously been menaced by bloodsucking carrots or brain-eating Martians; in “Close Encounters,” the new extraterrestrials were positively angelic.
On its release in 1977, The New Republic characterized the movie, which was Mr. Spielberg’s follow-up to “Jaws,” as “an event in the history of faith.” Writing in The New York Times, the Catholic priest and sociologist Andrew M. Greeley extolled the movie’s sense of religious wonder. The conservative Christian publication Today’s Student, which had a university following, went even further in asserting that “nothing has ever approached the rapture and enchantment” of the movie’s closing scenes, adding that its “grand scale” and “magnitude” approached the work of God.
However universal, “Close Encounters” was very much a generational statement. Roy’s faith in the extraterrestrials inspires him to drop out, grow a beard and rebel against an official culture of lies. His female counterpart, Jillian Guiler (Melinda Dillon), is already something of a hippie, a solitary artist living alone with her young son (Cary Guffey) on an isolated farm.
Most profoundly perhaps, “Close Encounters” (which was in production during Jimmy Carter’s 1976 presidential campaign) expressed a yearning to be born again — as a child. Roy longs to escape adult responsibility. The film raises legitimate fears of losing one’s job, home, family and, in a powerfully poignant sequence, even one’s sanity. Yet the more Roy surrenders to extraterrestrial influence, the more infantile he becomes.
As the movie reaches its climax, other adults — many of them scientists — are shown acting like children. Science itself is downgraded, as when the appearance of the extraterrestrials prompts one scientist to inform his colleagues, “It’s the first day of school, fellas,” or when another suggests that Albert Einstein might have been an alien.
Mr. Spielberg is a master of popular culture whose forbears include Alfred Hitchcock (the arch-manipulator) and Walt Disney (the apostle of childhood innocence, but no less manipulative for all that). If “Jaws” was Mr. Spielberg’s Hitchcock film, “Close Encounters” channeled Disney. Interviewed by Rolling Stone at the time of the movie’s release, Mr. Spielberg credited “When You Wish Upon a Star” as his inspiration, citing “the feeling the song gave me when I was a kid listening to it,” presumably as the theme to the “Disneyland” TV show.
A baby boomer like Mr. Spielberg, I too watched “Disneyland” as a child (and remember the excited feeling that in watching it I was in a mind-meld with every kid in America). My first experience of “Close Encounters” came several months into its opening run, waiting in line at the neighborhood movie-house on East 86th Street in Manhattan. As memorable as the movie itself was the spectacle of patrons exiting the theater. Many appeared to be in tears.
“Close Encounters” would not have the same effect on me, but it did teach me something about the power of the film medium. The climactic light show is a drama of cinematic communication (and communion) in which nothing (and everything) is communicated — at least on the big screen. I cannot imagine a comparable “Close Encounters” seen on a laptop.