When far left meets far right, sparks fly. Students from both sides discuss their political journeys.
Last semester’s protests at the University of California, Berkeley, challenged liberal presumptions about who exactly the good guys were. Anti-fascists, or antifa, clad like ninjas and hellbent on silencing a speaker (the provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos), smashed windows and set fires. Clashes with right-wingers erupted again at rallies in March and April in support of free speech (a “messy pepper spray mosh pit,” as one anti-fascist described it).
The antifa collective, fueled by an emboldened right wing, has become a growing subculture, particularly on West Coast campuses. Fearful of being doxxed (having your personal information posted online) by “alt-right trolls,” anti-fascists are cautious about their identity. Most don’t even communicate over social media or phone. And many protest as a black bloc, a tactic ascribed to 1980s Germany in which a group protests anonymously, faces concealed by T-shirts, bandannas or masks to avoid detection and protect from pepper spray.
Antifa is actually more label than organization, its believers connected by calls to action on websites like It’s Going Down. Anarchist, communist or just liberal, they oppose fascism with militant zeal. But some formalize into affinity groups like the Pastel Bloc; dressed in pastels — a play on the head-to-toe uniform of black bloc — they offer medical attention during protests.
Black bloc is often seen as mostly white males looking to wreak havoc for their cause. A half-dozen Berkeley antifa members who agreed to speak on record to us saw merit in that stereotype, but since the Trump inauguration, they said, those behind the masks represent the spectrum of gender and race. “People showing up to the protests are the ones with the most to lose,” said Neil Lawrence, a Berkeley student. Part of his decision to go public as a transgender anti-fascist is to counteract the stereotype.
“Nobody wanted a street fight,” Mr. Lawrence said.
Sitting in his dorm room at the end of the school year, surrounded by tomes by anarchist thinkers, a freshman of Muslim descent named Dan was explaining his political journey. Suharto’s forces had killed his grandfather during the Communist purge in Indonesia. The family immigrated to Southern California but was never political, fearful of suffering repression again.
The antifa didn’t protest at the April 27 rally supporting Ann Coulter, whose talk was canceled for that day by a university fearful of violence. “Someone like Coulter, she’s pretty much nothing to us,” Dan explained. “There’s a different level of threat here. Milo Yiannopoulos, he’s at the vanguard of a new right movement that’s much more dangerous than the conservative establishment.” Yiannopoulos supporters, he said, had displayed anti-Semitic posters and Nazi salutes at the free speech rallies.
He predicts more violence for the new school year. Mr. Yiannopoulos has announced a weeklong tent city on Sproul Plaza this fall, vowing in a Facebook post to “bring an army if I have to.” And the conservative commentator Ben Shapiro plans to speak in September.
Nathan Damigo was caught on video punching a woman in the face and he’s not apologizing for it. “I feel that I was completely within reason,” Mr. Damigo said via Skype from his home in California’s central valley. The punch that went viral was during the Patriots’ Day rally in Berkeley last semester, in support of free speech. Mr. Damigo said he had seen the woman swinging a foot-long bottle at Trump supporters. “It was swing or get swung on,” he said of the punch.
The video helped elevate Mr. Damigo to the pantheon of young, influential white nationalists. He said his organization, Identity Evropa, which advocates racial separation, now has 450 dues-paying members on dozens of campuses.
In prison on a four-year sentence for armed robbery, he began reading, taking a particular interest in race. His reading list included “White Identity: Racial Consciousness in the 21st Century” by Jared Taylor and “The Bell Curve,” whose co-author Charles Murray was prevented from speaking at Middlebury College earlier this year. “And yes, I read David Duke, if you want to throw that in there.” From the other side of the argument was “The Triple Helix” by Richard Lewontin. He earned an associate degree in social and behavioral sciences while incarcerated and on release immediately enrolled in Cal State.
Andrew Beale and Sonner Kehrt are graduate journalism students at the University of California, Berkeley.