The decision of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan in United States v. Newman, which roiled the world of insider trading when it was announced in December 2014, seems to be relegated to little more than a footnote in the history of securities fraud with an opinion from the same court affirming the conviction of Mathew Martoma.
Insider trading law has seen many twists and turns the last few years, and figuring out what is required to prove tipping of inside information meant Mr. Martoma had to wait almost three years for his appeal to be decided.
The law may be settled now with the decision’s finding that the approach in Newman to tipping confidential information “can no longer be sustained.” That is, unless the Second Circuit decides to have all 13 active judges rehear the case, known as en banc review, potentially raising anew questions about what evidence is needed to prove an illegal tip of confidential information.
Mr. Martoma was a portfolio manager at SAC Capital Advisors, Steven A. Cohen’s hedge fund firm that later pleaded guilty to insider trading and shut down. Mr. Martoma obtained confidential information by meeting regularly with Dr. Sidney Gilman, who worked as a paid consultant through an expert networking firm, about a clinical trial of an Alzheimer’s drug.
When Dr. Gilman disclosed that the drug test was unsuccessful, SAC sold its position in two pharmaceutical companies and then shorted the shares before the prices dropped on disclosure of the results, generating profits and avoided losses of more than $250 million.
After a jury found Mr. Martoma guilty and he was sentenced to nine years in prison, the Second Circuit issued the Newman decision, which overturned the convictions of two hedge fund managers who were steps removed from the original source of inside information.
In December 2016, however, the Supreme Court decided Salman v. United States, rejecting the Second Circuit’s requirement that the benefit received by a tipper be something of “a pecuniary or similarly valuable nature.” But the court said nothing about the “meaningfully close personal relationship” aspect when the information involved friends rather than family members.
Mr. Martoma argued in his appeal that the relationship with Dr. Gilman hardly qualified as a friendship, being more of a professional connection that was neither meaningful nor close. He sought a new trial in which the jury would have to decide whether the Newman personal relationship requirement for tipping inside information was met, something that had not been an issue at the time of his trial.
The Justice Department argued to the Second Circuit that there was a lucrative business relationship: SAC paid Dr. Gilman thousands of dollars to speak with Mr. Martoma, more than enough to prove a benefit. The government further claimed that the Salman decision made it “clear that a gift of confidential information to a trading friend or relative is enough to satisfy the personal benefit requirement” with no need to show how close the relationship actually was.
The majority opinion rejected “the categorical rule that an insider can never personally benefit from disclosing inside information as a gift without a ‘meaningfully close personal relationship.’” That means just about any connection can suffice as long as the information is given with the intention that it be used for profitable trading as if the tipper gave the money directly, a potentially significant broadening of insider trading.
Judge Rosemary S. Pooler issued a vigorous 44-page dissent, arguing that the majority turned the analysis of what constitutes a gift into something so vague and subjective that “the result will be liability in many cases where it could not previously lie.” She argued that the decision “radically alters insider trading law for the worse” because almost any tip can be considered a gift if it is used for profitable trading even if the personal relationship might be tenuous.
With the conviction affirmed, is this the end of the line for Mr. Martoma?
He can ask for a review by the full appeals court, pointing to Judge Pooler’s lengthy dissent to argue that the majority opinion went too far in flatly rejecting Newman’s “meaningfully close personal relationship” requirement that expands the gift theory of a benefit far beyond what the Supreme Court endorsed in Salman.
Even if the Second Circuit judges are concerned that the majority opinion went a bit too far in making tipping depend on whether it looks like a gift without regard to the personal relationship, they can always use later cases to clarify, and perhaps cut back on, the analysis.
If Mr. Martoma cannot persuade the Second Circuit to rehear his case, there is always the possibility of appealing further to the Supreme Court. But there are additional roadblocks that make it unlikely the justices will review the case.
In addition to the fact that only a very small percentage of cases are taken up by the court, the justices just decided Salman last term, offering what appeared to be the final word on tipping in a unanimous opinion. It would be uncommon for the court to take up almost the exact same issue just a year later, especially in an area of the law in which it reviews a case about once every 20 years.
Another problem is that the Second Circuit decision also upheld Mr. Martoma’s conviction on the ground that the payments Dr. Gilman received from SAC through the expert networking firm meant there was a quid pro quo relationship. Although he was not paid for the actual information provided to Mr. Martoma about the negative drug trial results, the majority opinion concluded there was enough evidence for the jury to a find a tangible benefit that would have met the requirement of the Newman case even before it was rejected in Salman.
If the majority opinion in Mr. Martoma’s case stands, then the Justice Department and the Securities and Exchange Commission have cause to celebrate.
The hurdle to proving unlawful tipping created by the Newman decision will be washed away, putting the focus on identifying some form of gift without having to dig too deeply into the relationship of the tipper and the recipient.