If watched directly from above, most dance performances would lose their savor. Bird’s-eye views are flattening. The tops of heads are seldom expressive.
But “Falls the Shadow,” the dance work that Daniil Simkin is presenting at the Guggenheim Museum on Monday and Tuesday, is designed to be looked down on — by spectators standing on the whorled ramps of the building’s vast rotunda.
But there’s more to see than foreshortened figures. Imagine a nearly ceaseless stream of digital imagery, beginning with unusual shadows. Computer-generated projections envelop the performers with auras as elastic as bubbles, shimmering and rippling at the edges like the hot air of a mirage. Sometimes the shadows linger after bodies exit, like the quick-fading imprint of fingers pressed on pale skin, or maybe like the soul after death.
Other times, the shadows swing around rapidly, suggesting the restless dance of a virtual sun. Or the projections seem more like smoke, which the dancers seem to blow at one another in the manner of battling wizards. The projections also cohere into patterns on the floor that resemble designs in sand, and as the dancers move, their bodies appear to scatter the grains, their slides and spins kicking up virtual dust.
The digital imagery isn’t confined to the floor. It flows up the sides of the space: a dark stain spreading, a flood rising, a supernova exploding. The light show travels to the spectators, surrounding them. It takes on the whole rotunda as its canvas, connecting the dance with the architecture.
“Falls the Shadow” is the second entry in the Works & Process Rotunda Project — performances commissioned to address the architectural properties of the Guggenheim’s interior, which Frank Lloyd Wright certainly didn’t envision with dance in mind. The first installment, presented by the tap dancers Michelle Dorrance and Nicholas Van Young in February, dealt mainly (and ingeniously) with acoustical challenges and possibilities. Mr. Simkin is much more focused on the visual dimension, and for his purposes, the rotunda’s white surfaces and top-down perspectives are a boon.
For the past few years, Mr. Simkin, a Russian-born principal dancer with American Ballet Theater, has been devoting some of his time off to a side project, Intensio, combining dancers of his high caliber with the latest developments in technology. One line of experimentation has involved electronic shadows on the stage floor, an effect that can be hard to see from the seats of many conventional theaters. That’s not a problem at the Guggenheim.
Mr. Simkin’s father, Dmitrij, is the project’s video designer. He has been concentrating on set and video design since retiring from his own career as a ballet dancer in 2007. A shared interest in dance and technology bonds father and son.
It is important to Daniil that the video be integrated and balanced with the dancing. “Otherwise, it becomes gimmicky,” he said.
For this project, the Simkins have sought help from the interactive media designer Arístides Job García Hernández. The choreography is by Alejandro Cerrudo, the Spanish-born resident choreographer of Hubbard Street Dance Chicago (also known for his recent collaboration with Wendy Whelan).
He had to get familiar with the technology very quickly. After a crash course in the possibilities, he created the choreography with the cast — Mr. Simkin; the Ballet Theater soloist Cassandra Trenary; and two contemporary dancers, Ana Lopez and Brett Conway — but without the video. Later, during tech rehearsals, he made adjustments.
But if the rotunda quashed certain ideas, it inspired others. The choreography strives to extend arms and legs horizontally, expanding the body’s silhouette and emphasizing length over elevation. Each dancer’s swirling path registers, and the performers often lie on the floor, making shapes on that plane.
They make shapes together, too: chains, circles, stars.  And all of this is amplified by the projections, responding to the dancers’ every move.
Yet another complication — “a very nice one,” in Mr. Cerrudo’s opinion — is the varied background of the dancers: half from classical ballet, half from Mr. Cerrudo’s contemporary side of the concert dance world. “We had to find a common vocabulary,” he said.
