Only three blocks long, Central Park South is lined on one side with busy buildings, where people live in apartments that are mostly pricey and often glamorous. Squirrels and statues reside on the other side, among the trees of Central Park.
Dr. Kaplan, 61, said he enjoyed the view so much that after opening his office at 200 Central Park South, in a mostly residential condominium, in 1989, he began looking for an apartment nearby. In 1994, he bought a two-bedroom, two-bath condo at 100 Central Park South, also known as Trump Parc East, with a panorama that extends to the park’s northern edge 51 blocks away. “You’ll laugh,” he said when asked the price: “I paid $750,000.” (At the moment, apartments in the building are listed for $2 million to $7 million, according to StreetEasy.) At first, he used the apartment on workdays, while his wife, Tova, and their three children, still in school, stayed in the leafy Bronx neighborhood of Riverdale. But these days, he and Tova spend most of their time there. “Riverdale is now the country house,” he said.
This short stretch along the park has become a “micro-neighborhood,” said Lawrence Lee, an associate broker at Triplemint real estate. “An identity has formed: It’s fun and exciting, with people on the street speaking every language imaginable,” he said.
In 2000, Mr. Pobuda, a business owner then recently divorced, bought a two-bedroom, two-and-a-half-bath apartment with a terrace overlooking the park. A few years later, he added an adjoining studio with another terrace. Each time, Mr. Pobuda said, he paid about $1.25 million. His first renovation cost nearly $1 million; the second, half a million.
Monuments bracket the neighborhood between Fifth Avenue and Columbus Circle. On the east, Grand Army Plaza features the Pulitzer Fountain, topped by a bronze statue of Pomona, the Roman goddess of abundance. Columbus Circle, on the west, is not technically part of the neighborhood, but it still has a big presence there, with its 70-foot granite column topped by a statue of the circle’s namesake Italian navigator.
In between is a phalanx of substantial buildings, including many that are architecturally ornate and have historic landmark status.
Other residents have reservations. Ms. Cafaro is an author of a May 2015 report by her community board’s Sunshine Task Force, which warned that super-tall buildings near the park will cast long shadows over it. “It’s not just one building, but the compilation,” she said.
A tower planned for the site of the Park Lane Hotel was canceled because of financing problems, and for the moment, the Park Lane remains a hotel. Other hotels, like the Plaza, the Ritz-Carlton and the JW Marriott Essex House, have added residences, with hotel amenities available to apartment owners. Doormen at these and other properties guard the private entrances. In 1981, Donald J. Trump purchased the Barbizon Hotel and a neighboring rental building at 100 Central Park South, with plans to replace the two structures with a mega-condo. Following a contentious battle with renters, the buildings stayed and, refurbished, are now condos called Trump Parc and Trump Parc East.
Stores on Central Park South include several high-end art galleries, a couple of spas and a FedEx store at the corner near Columbus Circle. Marea, a highly rated restaurant, is in the same building. Farther east, with a bustling sidewalk cafe, is Sarabeth’s and, inside the Plaza, the Palm Court and a food court.
Central Park South has name recognition around the world, said Mr. Lee of Triplemint, “and people will pay for that cachet.” Apartments without park views tend to be cheaper, he noted, but still command premiums because of the address.
On the same August date, there were 45 apartments listed for rent, from a studio for $2,450 a month to the apartment listed for sale at $39.5 million, which was also listed as an $85,000-a-month rental.
The sidewalk scene is often frenetic, with tourists and food vendors — and sometimes odorous, thanks to the carriage horses along Central Park. Many buildings contribute to the Central Park Conservancy’s Perimeter Association, which cleans sidewalks daily. The conservancy has restored the entire south end of the park in recent years, said a conservancy spokeswoman. A 2011 study showed 3.5 million annual park visits were made from Columbus Circle, 3.2 million from the Fifth Avenue corner and 3.7 million from the three entrances in between.
Students are zoned for Public School 111 Adolph S. Ochs, which last year had 334 students. This school, on West 53rd Street, has been phasing out middle-school grades and will have only prekindergarten through fifth grade this fall. Its 2015-2016 School Quality Snapshot showed 37 percent of students met state standards in English versus 38 percent citywide; in math, 36 percent met state standards versus 36 percent citywide. Students are also zoned for Middle School 297, a new school in Greenwich Village that will open this fall in temporary quarters on East 15th Street.
Many workplaces are within walking distance. The N line stops full-time, and the R and W lines part-time, on Central Park South between Fifth Avenue and Avenue of the Americas and also nearby, at 57th Street and Seventh Avenue, where they are joined by the Q full-time. There is an entrance to the A, C, B, D and 1 lines on Central Park South near Columbus Circle. The F train stops at 57th Street and Avenue of the Americas.
The Plaza Hotel opened in 1907, and its exterior was named a New York City Landmark in 1969. In 2005, the city added a number of the hotel’s interior spaces. Among them were the Palm Court, the Oak Room and the Terrace Room, “used for receptions and press conferences including that of Marilyn Monroe and Laurence Olivier” in 1956, the Landmarks Preservation report noted, when the stars confirmed that they would appear in “The Prince and the Showgirl” and Monroe’s dress strap broke, big news at the time.