The American Civil Liberties Union was under severe duress. Hate mail poured in, death threats, and the executive director was spat on.
That philosophy came into renewed focus last week as the organization went to court to fight for the right of white nationalists to hold a rally at Emancipation Park in Charlottesville, Va.
But the episode is likely to be remembered less for the constitutional principle than for its violent toll: brawls, ugly confrontations and the death of a 32-year-old woman.
This year has been a banner one for the civil liberties group, which is expected by some on the left to serve as a legal bulwark against some of the Trump administration’s policies. Indeed, the A.C.L.U. helped secure the first court ruling against the travel ban.
Membership in the group has almost quadrupled, and donations online have reached $83 million since the election, when, in a typical period, about $5 million or less might be expected, a spokeswoman for the A.C.L.U., Stacy Sullivan, said.
But the group’s defense of the Charlottesville rally has crystallized a recurring challenge for the organization: how to pursue its First Amendment advocacy, even for hate-based groups, without alienating its supporters.
Ms. Sullivan acknowledged that the organization was aware of “a lot of threats” on social media of people saying they would drop their membership, although neither she nor the group’s executive director, Anthony D. Romero, would provide more details.
And with numerous alt-right rallies scheduled in the coming days and weeks, the A.C.L.U. also faces the question of how to respond to the next case involving a white nationalist rally that the local authorities try to block.
Another potential First Amendment showdown in Texas already looms. Citing safety concerns, Texas A&M on Monday canceled a white nationalist rally scheduled for Sept. 11. The rally organizer, Preston Wiginton, told the Texas Tribune that he might sue and he might seek the A.C.L.U.’s help.
Since Charlottesville, the A.C.L.U. has clearly wrestled with what to do when the next case comes along. It indicated on Thursday that, in evaluating whether to take free-speech cases involving public gatherings, the group would consider the potential for violence at the event and whether protesters were going to be carrying firearms. But Ms. Sullivan, the spokeswoman, said that was not a new policy; rather, it reflected existing practices.
Even so, in the first months of the Trump presidency, the A.C.L.U. seemed to be more cautious about which fights it would embrace. It stayed uncharacteristically quiet when the University of California, Berkeley, canceled speeches by two right-wing writers and provocateurs, Milo Yiannopoulos and Ann Coulter, earlier this year, issuing statements and Twitter messages, mainly after the controversy had passed. And when a federal judge in April weighed whether Richard Spencer, a leader of the so-called alt-right, could hold an event at a public university in Alabama, the A.C.L.U. was absent from the case.
The civil liberties union’s apparent absence from some of these disputes prompted questions, even criticism, about the organization’s continuing commitment to fighting old-fashioned free speech cases for unpopular clients.
The A.C.L.U. has long maintained that defending the First Amendment rights of white supremacists does not only vindicate constitutional rights where they are under attack, but also protects speech rights for all groups. Social justice and equality, the group believes, are best served with more speech, on all sides, and by confronting hateful ideas head-on rather than suppressing them.
But some on the left argue that freedom of speech should not extend to hate speech. Under this view, defending the free speech rights of racists does not, in the long run, strengthen the civil liberties of minority groups.
Those divisions were on display within the organization last week, when the A.C.L.U. took on lawsuits in support of two figures associated with the alt right. In one case, the A.C.L.U. filed a lawsuit against the Washington Metro system, for, among other things, removing advertisements for Mr. Yiannopoulos’ book “Dangerous” from subway stations and cars.
The organization’s Virginia affiliate then brought a lawsuit representing a Charlottesville man who was organizing a rally to protest the removal of a statue of the Confederate general Robert E. Lee. The City Council had changed the park’s name from Lee Park to Emancipation Park in June. After initially granting him a permit to hold the rally at the park, the city tried to move it to a larger park, about a mile away.
The A.C.L.U. argued that the rally organizers ought to be able to stage the event at the park associated with Lee — where the symbolism was greatest and the meaning of the rally clearest. The city argued that for safety reasons the protest should be moved to the other site. A federal judge sided with the A.C.L.U.
A.C.L.U. membership dropped by 60,000 from 1973 to 1978, and by 1979 the group was facing a $500,000 deficit. Yet it seems possible that the far right of today could prove more divisive for the A.C.L.U. than the neo-Nazis and Skokie ever were.
White nationalists over the last two years have made their presence felt in the national discourse more than they had in decades. That is partly because the far right has been emboldened by President Trump, who has been reluctant to condemn white nationalists.
Meanwhile, much of the newfound interest in the A.C.L.U. has been driven by opposition to the president’s policies.
