Surely there are some kids who are eager for school to start, but I have not met them. My 9-year-old and 5-year-old daughters have little interest now in trading day trips to the beach and family movie nights for an unfamiliar classroom and nightly homework. Still, a mental shift occurs as the season starts to change.
The beauty of this transition period, though, is that it’s a prime opportunity for parents and kids to explore the mixed emotions that crop up as we say goodbye to summer and say hello to new expectations. So as you figure out your kids’ soccer schedule, make arrangements for that sitter or math tutor, or order new highlighters, be sure to involve your kids in the process, no matter how old they are. Take these next few weeks to talk with them about what they’ve liked or disliked about school in the past, what they’re ready to do differently this year, and how you can help them prepare.
Then, avoid the knee-jerk reaction to fix everything. Instead, ask your child to brainstorm ways to make the situation better. “We want resilient children, and a resilient kid has the capacity to think about possible solutions to problems. So you can start flexing that muscle with your child of any age, as school approaches,” Ms. Simmons said.
For a kindergartner who is nervous about a new school, you might ask him to think about whether he will feel more comfortable driving to school together or taking the bus with neighbors. For a high school junior who is anxious about SAT prep, ask him to think about what he could change in his study routine that might give him more confidence. This line of thought teaches children that they have the capacity to address challenges. “That’s self-efficacy,” Ms. Simmons said. It’s an empowering lesson that kids can apply during the school year and beyond.
Acknowledge your children’s goals and develop a plan together to work toward them. “I would ask them, ‘What do you need to be successful with homework this year? Do you need a space away from your sibling’s loud video game? How much sleep do you think you need? How long do you need in the morning?’” Dr. Gilboa said.
Then consider what new responsibilities and privileges your child is ready to handle. Perhaps your fourth grader is now in charge of making her own lunch but she also gets the freedom to walk home from school without an adult. Or maybe this is the year your teenager can take the car to school but he also needs to do his own laundry. “This is a fresh start,” Dr. Gilboa said. “I think the month of August is a great time to practice.” The kids will be much more willing to comply if they’ve had a say in the decisions.
If your family has gotten accustomed to late nights and leisurely mornings, start adjusting the household’s sleep-wake schedule now to avoid a crash-and-burn scenario the first week of school. Have the kids go to bed 15 minutes earlier each night for a week or two in advance of the first day of school so that their bodies gradually adjust to an earlier wake time, suggested Ms. Brown Braun. 
Ideally, your pediatrician is a partner in your child’s well-being. And depending on your child’s needs, it may also be time to let your kid step up and take a more active role in the partnership. This could mean your child may now fill out his own health forms or do more of the talking at appointments. “As kids get older, the parent goes from being the C.E.O. of the child’s care to the consultant,” Dr. Maslow said.
The reason friendships have this positive spillover effect is that they contribute to a child’s overall sense of identity and belonging outside of the immediate family. Fortunately, there are ways you can help foster your child’s friendships. For instance, have a late-summer barbecue with a family whose child is going to be in your kid’s class. 
 Remind him of his talents and strengths — and the fact that he’s done this first-day-of-school thing before and survived. 
Then, sit back and savor the rest of the summer. Make it a priority to leave the office early and go to the pool with your kids. Or find that three-day weekend when you can finally go camping as a family.
Imagine the possibilities and try to make it happen so that you’re ready to greet back-to-school time refreshed.