CAMDEN, N.J. — The three Democratic congressmen sat at one end of a long, rectangular table that extended nearly the length of the Teamsters hall here, surrounded by about 50 union leaders, members and local residents offering a mix of praise, complaints and political strategy.
The need for the Democratic Party and the labor movement to take stock of their historically close alliance became clear after November’s election when Hillary Clinton’s support among union voters declined by 7 percentage points from 2012 when former President Barack Obama was re-elected.
Representatives Mark DeSaulnier of California, Mark Pocan of Wisconsin and Donald Norcross of New Jersey finished a four-stop, cross-country tour on Aug. 4 that set out to do just that: understand and tap into the economic anxiety felt by many working class voters, as part of a broader, fractious and painful self-examination Democrats have undertaken following Donald J. Trump’s ascension to the White House.
The Democratic Party leadership recently released its “Better Deal” platform, a progressive policy agenda designed to address issues central to the working class.
Along with Representative Debbie Dingell of Michigan, who could not make the final leg of the trip, the four Democratic House members are planning to release their report, “The Future of Work, Wages and Labor,” in the coming months. Though they view their work as a complement to the party’s progressive platform, they also acknowledge that fellow Democrats may disagree with some of their proposals.
Some of them that might even sound, well, Trumpian.
“Those trade agreements, we’re still paying a price on NAFTA,” Mr. Norcross said in an interview, referring to the North American Free Trade Agreement, a frequent target for Mr. Trump on the campaign trail last year.
Mr. Norcross argued that some of the demands within his party for uncompromising legislative positions has left Democrats on the wrong side of the jobs argument.
The idea for the initiative began a year ago when Mr. DeSaulnier, a freshman congressman from the Bay Area, saw the booming so-called gig economy spawned largely by Uber and other tech start-ups in his district, and wondered how lower paying, part-time jobs might be affecting working families. So he asked the two tradesmen he knew in the House, Mr. Pocan, a painter, and Mr. Norcross, an electrician.
That conversation inspired a yearlong tour by the four members of Congress, which culminated this month in a labor town hall meeting inside a crowded Teamsters building in this struggling city in southern New Jersey.
Ending the tour here, after stopping in Michigan and Wisconsin (which have “right-to-work” laws that prevent organized labor from forcing all workers to pay union dues or fees), offered a bit of a throwback case study: Though working class families in New Jersey face similar problems as the working class elsewhere, the state still maintains strong ties between organized labor and the Democratic Party.
The Democratic candidate for governor, Philip D. Murphy, heavily courted the major state unions and relied on union-organizing efforts to help him to his overwhelming primary win. The New Jersey Education Association, which endorsed Mr. Murphy, is considered one of the most powerful teachers unions in the country, while Mr. Sweeney holds a powerful position in an international union.
After the town hall meeting, Mr. Paylor expressed both comfort and frustration. He did not know that Mr. Norcross had been working to introduce bills aimed at his interests, including one that would direct the Department of Energy to provide training for energy industry jobs and another that would allow people paying for apprenticeships to receive the same tax benefits as those paying for traditional college.
And, if Mr. Norcross has his way, maybe a few more working class candidates will appear on the ballot.
