In the show “The Duchess of Carnegie Hall: Photographs by Editta Sherman” opening Friday at the New-York Historical Society, royalty photographs royalty, and everyone looks grand. The subjects facing the camera included some of the pop culture sovereigns of the day, the 1940s and ’50s: Carl Sandburg, Tyrone Power, Leopold Stokowski. The person behind the lens was, though more discreetly crowned, no less lofty a luminary, as she probably would have been the first to say.
And hundreds of people over the years — including contemporary figures like Tilda Swinton — found their way to her, many to sit in front of the commandingly monumental 1930s camera that, she said, had been her father’s.
Editta Sherman was born Edith Rinaolo in Philadelphia in 1912. Her father, an Italian immigrant, was a portrait and wedding photographer who taught her the rudiments of the trade. In 1935 she met and married Harold Sherman, a sound engineer, with whom she had five children. The family moved around a lot to accommodate his work, and it was only after his health gave way — he was diabetic — that Ms. Sherman turned her photographic training to professional ends.
In the mid-1940s, on Martha’s Vineyard, where her husband had roots, she set herself up as a studio portraitist. The island attracted a seasonal influx of film and literary personalities. And Ms. Sherman, with her silver-screen smile and a manner that sugared chutzpah with charm, coaxed a few such vacationers — Max Eastman and W. Somerset Maugham — into sitting for her.
They liked the results and recommended her services to their peers, which prompted the Shermans to move to New York City. There, after some shifts of address, in 1949, they landed in one of the many modest-size artist studios perched atop Carnegie Hall.
For a family, the quarters were cramped: 900 square feet, with a closet-size kitchen and a bathroom down the hall. For an artist, which Ms. Sherman considered herself to be, Studio 1208, was near-ideal. It was flooded with light from skylights and floor-to-ceiling windows facing north toward Central Park. And it was surrounded by stimulating, photogenic neighbors. The whole complex, with its rehearsal rooms, ballet and drama studios and work-live cells, was a hive of talent. Marlon Brando, Norman Mailer and Marilyn Monroe had been, or would be, in temporary residence; musical traffic came and went in Carnegie Hall downstairs; Manhattan was just outside the door.
These pictures aren’t on view here, though there’s a small illustrational shot taken by Andrew Brucker of Ms. Sherman and Mr. Cunningham together. It accompanies one of the exhibition’s few nonphotographic items: a rainbow-hued Bill Blass diva-dress that Ms. Sherman owned, wore and made even more diva by turning its feathered hem into a boa.
