New York|An Antebellum Hero, but to Whom?
An Antebellum Hero, but to Whom?
The scenes of statues of Confederate generals being toppled from their perches or surrounded by torch-wielding white supremacists shouting racist and anti-Semitic slogans reminded Diane Collier of another monument that has roiled residents in East Harlem. On Fifth Avenue and East 103rd Street, across from the New York Academy of Medicine, is an imposing monument to Dr. J. Marion Sims, whose fame as the father of modern gynecology came at the expense of enslaved black women on whom he operated without anesthesia or informed consent.
The local community board, Community Board 11, which Ms. Collier chairs, had been going back and forth with the city’s Department of Parks and Recreation about the wording of historical markers that would be affixed to the Sims monument to provide sobering historical context. In June 2016, she and the community board found the words they had been searching for.
This was not a new sentiment, but one that the Parks Department officials had resisted, telling critics that it would not remove art because of objections to its content. But as Ms. Collier watched recent news reports from the South, she was struck by the comments of Mayor Steve Benjamin of Columbia, S.C., who told MSNBC that the most offensive statue on the statehouse grounds was not of a Confederate soldier, but of Sims, who was a native of the state.
New York is now dealing with its own Confederate issues, after Mayor Bill de Blasio announced a 90-day review of what he called any “symbols of hate on city property.” The busts of two Southern generals will be removed from the Hall of Fame for Great Americans on the campus of Bronx Community College, and Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo called for the renaming of two streets that bear the names of Confederate generals at Fort Hamilton, an Army base in Brooklyn.
Sam Biederman, a spokesman for the Parks Department, said any decision about the Sims statue would be made by the panel the mayor had convened. Mr. Biederman added that his agency was still working with the East Harlem neighborhood and elected officials on affixing historical markers to the statue, even though the community board wants it taken down.
To some neighborhood residents, the controversy over the statue of Sims is not an abstract battle. Marina Ortiz, a local preservationist who has helped lead a campaign to remove the statue, said it was a daily reminder of medical experimentation on African-Americans and Puerto Ricans in the 20th century. More recently, she said, a Tennessee judge had to rescind a most likely unconstitutional offer he made to reduce sentences of convicted inmates by 30 days if they agreed to a vasectomy.
Sentiments like these persuaded Harriet Washington, a medical ethicist, to support the community’s desire to remove the statue. Ms. Washington, who is African-American, had originally favored a historical marker or even a statue of the enslaved women who had been used in the experiments. But a 2015 visit to Germany, where she had lived as a child, shook her.
Confederate statues, she added, wield a symbolic “tyranny” whose mere presence underscores “its power and importance, rather than virtue.” President Trump has lamented the irreplaceable “beauty” that is lost by removing the statues, but Ms. Washington wonders about the underlying message. Standards of beauty change, she noted.
Ms. Collier said Community Board 11 had yet to receive a response from the Parks Department to its demand to remove the statue. And while parks officials worry about setting a precedent, this would not be the first time the location of the Sims statue had been changed: It was originally in Bryant Park and was moved to its present location during a renovation of the park in 1934. And then there is the case of “Civic Virtue,” a much-loathed statue that had been near Queens Borough Hall and depicted a muscular hero towering over two women symbolizing vice. The statue is now in Green-Wood Cemetery in Brooklyn, moved there in 2012 by the city’s Public Design Commission. Ms. Collier found that example tantalizing.
