In an interview with The New York Times an hour before being formally approved by Parliament, the interim prime minister, Shahid Khaqan Abbasi — the petroleum minister who is a longtime politician, airline owner and skydiving buff — also vowed to fix what he described as political abnormalities between the executive, judicial and military branches that had felled previous governments.
Mr. Abbasi, 58, took over for Nawaz Sharif, the three-term prime minister who was long-plagued by corruption allegations. The Supreme Court ruled on Friday that Mr. Sharif was disqualified because of undeclared assets. The ruling was based partly on revelations of offshore wealth held by Mr. Sharif’s children, disclosed in leaked documents from Panama last year.
With strong fealty to Mr. Sharif, Mr. Abbasi will run Pakistan with the expectation of eventually being replaced by Mr. Sharif’s handpicked successor as leader of the dominant Pakistan Muslim League party — his younger brother Shehbaz Sharif, who must first vie for the parliamentary seat vacated by the former leader’s disqualification.
Shehbaz Sharif is currently the chief minister of Punjab Province, Pakistan’s most crucial power base.
But there is no guarantee that the corruption claims that brought down Mr. Sharif will leave his younger brother unscathed, raising the possibility that Mr. Abbasi’s tenure as prime minister could last indefinitely.
The Muslim League holds 188 of 342 seats in Parliament’s lower house, and with additional votes from its allies, Mr. Abbasi won 221 votes to win the top slot. He will remain petroleum minister while assuming the job that was held by Mr. Sharif, whom he described as a victim of an unfair Supreme Court decision.
But he insisted that he would not function as a “bench warmer” for Mr. Sharif’s sibling, and said his first order of business would be to improve the executive’s relationship with the military and the judiciary.
“There are certain issues here which I cannot reconcile with, the way our whole system operates, the relationship between the judiciary and the executive, within the executive, the civil-military relationship,” Mr. Abbasi said.
Nawaz Sharif has tense ties with Pakistan’s army, and his previous government had been toppled by a bloodless coup in 1999. During his most recent tenure, Mr. Sharif’s overtures of more openness toward India were spurned by the army. Speculation also circulated that the military had secretly supported street protests to dislodge Mr. Sharif’s government in 2014.
Mr. Abbasi’s political history is not pristine. He is accused of violating rules in awarding a liquefied natural gas import contract in 2015, a case under investigation by Pakistan’s anticorruption regulator, the National Accountability Bureau.
He has dismissed the accusations as the work of powerful oil interests that wanted to subvert competition from liquefied natural gas. Under his watch, Pakistan built its first liquefied natural gas terminal in 2015, and a second terminal is due to come online in October.
“If the courts operate under public pressure and media pressure, then God help us all. I would then not go to court but pray for justice,” Mr. Abbasi said.
The new interim prime minister is an aviation enthusiast who loves to fly planes and skydive. He owns the low-cost Airblue airline and described himself as an “outdoors person” who enjoys camping and hiking. He is also well known for driving to work without a security detail.
Many analysts suspect that Nawaz Sharif will continue to make major decisions behind the scenes for Mr. Abbasi, but the new leader rejected such conjecture.
