When Elle Hearns watched the video clip someone had sent to her on social media, it really stung.

“I was ashamed, I was embarrassed, I was angry,” she said.
At the heart of Ms. Hearns’s pain is a betrayal that black transgender people say has long afflicted them.
With few exceptions, black transgender women and men say that they get more hatred from black people than anyone else, even though they have been on the front lines protesting issues that affect all African-Americans.
Ms. Narcisse, a black transgender woman, said that she has received more support from whites, and that she is on edge around African-Americans because she does not think they will stand with her if she is attacked.
Many black people’s views on transgender people come in part from the central role that religion and the church play in black life, several transgender people said. It also stems from an emphasis on hypermasculinity in black culture, which has deep roots in black men having to use physical strength to survive generations of oppression, they said.
“To be seen as feminine if you’re seen as a black male is a sign of weakness,” said Kiara St. James, the director of the New York Transgender Advocacy Group.
That attitude could mean grim consequences for black transgender people.
Some black men who knowingly engage in relationships with transgender women might become ashamed when others find out, turning violent against their partners, advocates said. Ms. St. James recalled being sexually assaulted in the streets of Flatbush, Brooklyn, by an acquaintance. When she asked passers-by for help, her attacker told them that she was transgender, and the would-be helpers instead mocked her.
Although the raw numbers are small, estimates suggest that transgender people are killed at a much higher rate than the general population. While the chance of a young adult being murdered is 1 in 12,000, that probability increases to 1 in 2,600 for young, black transgender women, according to an analysis by the news organization Mic. At least 111 people who were transgender or did not identify with a gender were killed between 2010 and 2016, the report said, with nearly three in four of them being black women or people who presented as feminine.
Lil Duval’s comments on the radio show, which aired on July 28, spoke to these grim statistics. The morning show on Power 105.1 — featuring the hosts DJ Envy, Angela Yee and Charlamagne Tha God — is known for its edgy interviews with celebrities, who have ranged from rappers to Hillary Clinton, who went on the show just weeks before last year’s election.
The hosts quickly told him that killing a transgender person was a hate crime and that he could not do that. But Lil Duval continued to make jokes and said it was about manipulation and taking away his choice.
In a statement to The New York Times released through his publicist on Saturday, Charlamagne Tha God denounced all prejudice and hate crimes, emphasizing that he wholeheartedly believed that violence against transgender people was wrong.
“Nobody should be killed just for existing,” he said.

The comments on the show would have been more upsetting if they hadn’t been so predictable, Ms. Narcisse said.
In the aftermath of the show, Ms. Hearns spent hours discussing how to respond with organizers with the Marsha P. Johnson Institute, an organization she is starting to advocate for black transgender women. They circulated a petition calling upon the radio station and its parent company, iHeartMedia, to remove “The Breakfast Club” from the air.
“I think the only way to move forward with the protection of underrepresented communities is to really push back and fight back against the cultural norms,” Ms. Hearns said.
In response to the show, Ashlee Marie Preston, a black transgender woman, interrupted Charlamagne Tha God while he spoke at an event last week. The backlash she drew for her protest, Ms. Preston said, was indicative of the harsh stigma toward transgender people she sees in black communities.
While she said she has received a lot of positive comments from black people on social media, Ms. Preston, the editor in chief of the feminist magazine Wear Your Voice, also got plenty of hate messages. One person said that transgender people were “getting out of hand.” Others were angry that they were criticizing a black show and defended Lil Duval as just sharing his opinion.
“Shame on both of you for the embarrassment y’all put on the black community,” Richard Dickerson wrote on Twitter.
The worst thing about the discussion on the radio, Ms. Preston said, was that it painted black transgender women as scheming and assigned all the blame to them.
