WASHINGTON — President Trump, whose evolving and sometimes equivocal assessments of moral responsibility for the deadly violence in Charlottesville, Va., have won him little but criticism, fundamentally altered his approach Monday night during a prime-time address on Afghanistan.
This time, he made no mention of Charlottesville, neo-Nazis or counterprotesters. Nor did the president, as he had in previous remarks, attempt to diagnose what divides the country.
Instead, he sounded a lot like the men and women he was addressing: the nation’s military, including its senior admirals and generals.
The top officers of the Navy, the Marines, the Army, the Air Force and the National Guard had come out one by one after the violence in Charlottesville to say that racism, hatred and extremism had no place in the military, and ran counter to its most important values. Though they did not refer specifically to the commander in chief, the sharp contrast with some of Mr. Trump’s comments was as clear as it was unusual.
“They transcend every line of race, ethnicity, creed, and color to serve together — and sacrifice together — in absolutely perfect cohesion,” he said. Mr. Trump implored Americans back home to uphold those same values — if for nothing else than for those fighting on their behalf.
The prepared remarks left a distinct impression of the influence of three senior advisers: Defense Secretary Jim Mattis, a retired Marine Corps general; John F. Kelly, also a retired Marine general who is chief of staff; and Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster of the Army, Mr. Trump’s national security adviser.
Mr. Trump offered no public accounting on Monday of how the apparent change of course squared with his earlier remarks. And by Tuesday night, when he held a campaign-style rally in Phoenix, it appeared the sentiment was not to last. Free of Monday’s solemnity, Mr. Trump tore into the news media for not giving him proper credit for his earlier statements, which he said had been consistent.
In fact, Mr. Trump’s statements on the violence in Charlottesville, where one woman died amid clashes between neo-Nazis, white supremacists and counterprotesters, have veered back and forth.
Mr. Trump initially said blame belonged on “many sides,” before giving a more carefully delivered condemnation of hate groups like the Ku Klux Klan and neo-Nazis. That response won measured praise.
But then, just a day later, in a contentious news conference, Mr. Trump reversed himself once again, doubling down on the responsibility of “both sides” and drawing an equivalence between the hate groups and those protesting them.
As many Republicans joined Democrats in condemning the remarks, they found their message stated clearly by an unexpected group: five military service chiefs.
The service chiefs were reinforced by Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, who said it had been crucial that they speak out.
Peter Feaver, a Duke University political scientist who was a national security official in the George W. Bush White House, said the chiefs — responsible for organizing, training and equipping a force that often is held up today as a model of integration — likely had seen little choice but to stand apart from the president.
Mr. Trump, he said, was wise to take the hint, especially as he set out to make a difficult case for increased involvement in Afghanistan.
