Companies have long chafed at law firms’ practice of billing by the hour.
Now, a huge corporation, Microsoft, is taking steps to move away from the traditional billing arrangement.
David Howard, Microsoft’s deputy general counsel, said that under a program begun last month, the software giant planned to rely much more heavily on alternative fee arrangements.
Microsoft is aiming to move 90 percent of the company’s legal work to such arrangements within two years, he said in a phone interview this week.
The company’s legal department has been examining its relationships with law firms over the past year, said Mr. Howard, who oversees litigation for Microsoft, an area in which expenditures are several hundred million dollars a year.
He emphasized that the move was less about saving money than it was about deepening relationships between Microsoft and the law firms that execute its legal strategy.
The change in Microsoft’s relationship with its law firms could help spur more companies to abandon the billable hour method of charging for legal services.
Corporations have been grumbling about billable hours for nearly a decade, with complaints rising after the 2008 financial crisis prompted cuts in legal budgets.
Companies began hiring more in-house lawyers, reducing costs by handling more routine legal work themselves rather than assigning it to outside counsel.
Most corporations have remained willing to pay for seasoned lawyers to resolve high-stakes legal matters, but they have been increasingly reluctant to subsidize additional costs like training entry-level lawyers. As demand for law firm services has decreased in recent years, firms have been more willing to agree to alternative arrangements like fixed fees to handle legal matters. Corporations have pushed this approach because it gives more certainty to their annual legal expenditures.
The firms that will be part of Microsoft’s revised program are Arent Fox; Covington & Burling; Davis Wright Tremaine; Fish & Richardson; Greenberg Traurig; K & L Gates; Latham & Watkins; Merchant & Gould; Orrick; Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton & Garrison; Perkins Coie; Sidley Austin; and Simpson Thacher & Bartlett.
Mr. Howard also said Microsoft planned to work more closely with law firms on diversity, which its legal department, along with those of companies like Facebook, has increasingly emphasized as a way to encourage firms to employ a broader variety of lawyers.