Updated, 10:48 a.m.
Good morning on this delightful Friday.

That’s what Alexandra Franklin, 18, a student at the New School, and her friends were doing yesterday.
Ms. Franklin was referring to one of the Street Seats, a pop-up seating area converted from parking spaces that provide a bit of greenery and relief in our crowded city. The park was installed in April by the Parsons School of Design on 13th Street near Fifth Avenue. This curbside micro park is stocked with red Fermob tables and chairs, and is separated from the street by a bamboo lattice fence.
This summer, you can dine or decompress in 18 of these “parklets.” We spent an afternoon in this one to experience what a parking-space-turned-mini-park was like.
In Greenwich Village, the 312-square-foot space — big enough for about two and a half cars or around 20 people to sit comfortably — was at or near capacity during most of the afternoon lunch rush.
The space felt intimate and, dare we say, calm, even as cars whizzed by a few feet away. The Ipe (Brazilian walnut) wood flooring, arranged like a boardwalk deck, is surrounded by bright yellow scotch broom shrubs, purple Russian sage plants and coral bells that hang in brown fabric pouches on a fence made of bamboo. Solar panels collect energy to power the park’s L.E.D.s at night.
About 250 people a day visit this tiny park.
Shannon O’Hare, 27, who works in digital advertising, is a semi-regular Street Seat diner.
There are drawbacks, she said, including the odor of car fumes, construction noise, dust and bees.
But she wouldn’t trade the park for a few extra parking spots.
What do you think about giving up parking spaces for pop-up parks? Let us know in the comments.
Today’s weather could make lunch on any curb a culinary thrill.
We’re expecting a high near 79, and blue skies streaked by cottony clouds.
Ditto this weekend. Sunny skies and highs in the mid-70s should see us through until Monday.
• Yankees host Mariners, 7:05 p.m. (WPIX). Mets at Nationals, 7:05 p.m. (SNY). New York Red Bulls host New York City F.C., 7 p.m. (ESPN).
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until Sept. 1.
• Yankees host Mariners, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Nationals, 4:05 p.m. (SNY).
• Yankees host Mariners, 1:05 p.m. (YES). Mets at Nationals, 1:35 p.m. (SNY). Liberty host Chicago Sky, 3 p.m. (MSG).
For any night owls, insomniacs, or party animals out there — the city might soon have a job for you: ambassador of New York City night life.
Yesterday, the City Council voted to establish an Office of Nightlife, which will act as an intermediary between City Hall and the night life industry.
The idea of a “night mayor” or “night czar,” a person responsible for the after-hours economy, caught on in Europe after Amsterdam created the position of nachtburgemeester in 2014.
Some of the responsibilities of the office in New York, it seems, will require a bouncer’s touch. The person holding the position will be responsible for resolving disputes and act as a liaison between nightlife establishments and residents.
The legislation also established a 12-member board that is charged with offering guidance to City Hall on night life trends as well as evaluating the city’s laws, and making recommendations on how to update them, if necessary.
Think you got what it takes? Councilman Rafael Espinal, who sponsored the bill, told the Brooklyn Paper that interested applicants can send résumés to City Hall or his office.
