Hurricane Harvey’s devastating effect on the Houston area has forced Major League Baseball to move the Astros’ home series this week against the Texas Rangers to St. Petersburg, Fla.
The three-game series, beginning Tuesday, will be played at Tropicana Field, home of the Tampa Bay Rays, who are out of town. In announcing the move, M.L.B. said no decision had been made on the Astros’ next series, which was to be in Houston against the Mets, starting Friday.
That series could end up in St. Petersburg as well.
With Houston trying to cope with vast damage from the storm, professional and college sports teams in Houston have been making contingency plans. The N.F.L.’s Houston Texans, who played an exhibition game in New Orleans on Saturday night, flew to Dallas afterward and have remained there since and are using the Cowboys’ practice facility.
The Rice University football team, upon returning from a game in Australia, are temporarily relocating to Texas Christian’s campus in Fort Worth until conditions stabilize. The University of Houston football team has temporarily moved to Austin, where it is sharing the facilities of the University of Texas, whose coach, Tom Herman, was the former coach at Houston.
The Astros flew to Dallas on Sunday night after completing their weekend series against the Los Angeles Angels in Anaheim, Calif., but remained in limbo until baseball made its decision to relocate the series against the Rangers. The Astros will be the home team for all three games.
It is not unheard-of for baseball to move games, but the damage and continued rain wrought by Hurricane Harvey could be more disruptive and could lead to a more extended relocation than in past incidents.
Actually, the most recent series relocations were not weather-related at all. A series between the Seattle Mariners and the Florida Marlins in 2011 was moved to Seattle from South Florida because of a scheduling conflict with a U2 concert. And a series between the Toronto Blue Jays and the Philadelphia Phillies in 2010 was moved to Toronto because of security concerns with the G20 Summit in town.
The most recent weather-related relocation also involved the Astros. Late in 2008, the Astros had a series with the Chicago Cubs moved to Milwaukee because of Hurricane Ike’s heavy rains. Playing the division-leading Cubs so close to their home turf was hardly a palatable decision for the Astros, who were seeking a wild-card berth in mid-September. The Astros lost the two games against the Cubs and failed to make the playoffs, finishing three and a half games behind the Milwaukee Brewers.
This season, the Astros do not have to worry much about making the playoffs — they carried a 13½-game lead in the American League West into Monday night’s games.
Though it might have been easier logistically to keep the Astros and the Rangers in the Arlington, Tex., area this week and then move the teams’ series on Sept. 25 to 27 to Houston, it would then force the Rangers — who are on the fringe of the A.L. wild-card race — to play 12 consecutive games on the road.
On the other hand, the Astros could now end up playing 18 straight games away from Houston — the just-completed series in Anaheim, six games in St. Petersburg if the series against the Mets is played there as well, and then a nine-game swing on the West Coast.
At which point, the Astros would return home in mid-September, assuming games in Houston would then be viable.