ISTANBUL — Adnan Mehel walked onto the field wearing an Ottoman-style robe and boots modeled after those worn by a 16th-century sultan. He trained his eye on his students as they stepped up to the starting line and aimed their bows. Mehel, who was instrumental in reviving traditional archery like this a decade ago, was watching over the fifth annual Conquest Cup, an archery competition that celebrates the anniversary of the conquest of Constantinople in 1453.
The event, which Mehel helps organize, was held over three days in late May at the Okcular Vakfi, which means “archery foundation.” One of the oldest sporting clubs in the country, it was originally a staging ground for Fatih Sultan Mehmet’s army of archers before they invaded Constantinople 564 years ago. The sultan was so impressed by his archers’ skill that he gave the land to them, and a tradition was born.
At the competition, a horn sounds and a group of archers dressed in traditional clothing hurry to the starting line. Each participant wears an outfit connected to their personal history. Some 427 competitors from 37 countries compete in the Conquest Cup, and the majority of the Turkish competitors are dressed in Ottoman-era outfits.
Rafael Tulegnov, a 30-year-old from Kazakhstan, wears clothing inspired by Genghis Khan that he designed himself. Competitors from Britain and Ireland came dressed as characters from Robin Hood.
The event takes place in the middle of Ramadan, so competitors who are observing the fast cannot eat or drink in the hot sun. Unlike many sporting events in Turkey, there is a balanced mix of male and female participants.
“I was brought up on Tolkien and Robin Hood so I always wanted to shoot a bow,” said Yevgeniya Bakhcevanova, a 29 year old from Kazakhstan wearing an outfit inspired by Turk-Mongol warriors.
While there is 71,750 Turkish lira in prize money (about $20,500) to be divided among the champions, there’s more to the event than simply winning and losing. Mahdi Eslamikhattibi Silab and his wife, Masoumeh (shown below), traveled here from their home in Tabriz, Iran, with their two children — Mohammad, 12, and Danız, 6 — who were also competing. Though none of the family members placed in the competition, it mattered little to their overall experience on the trip.
Reminders of modern times appear throughout the event, but the traditional pursuit of archery is the real draw for many competitors. Their bows are made of materials like wood, sinew, horn and antler, while modern archery uses compound bows made of fiberglass, aluminum, and other nonorganic materials that assist the archer. “Modern archery is like you’re shooting a machine; with traditional, you feel it,” Sebnum Salika Cakiroglu said.
Mehel made his outfit after researching Ottoman fashions, and the one he wore at the Cup is made with a late 15th-/early 16th-century pattern based on the caftans used at the Battle of Mohács in Hungary.
Mehel took a course in leather working for three years before making the garment himself. His hat — known as a Keche — is based on a cap worn by Ottoman soldiers that was traditionally meant to bring luck on the battlefield. His boots were based on a pair currently in the Topkapi palace, once worn by Selim II, who ruled the empire in the second half of the 16th century.
Khadijah Qureshy, part of a home-schooled family, came to Turkey to participate in traditional army after having lived in Britain, Syria and Yemen. She has been practicing since she was 12. “I was trembling with nerves — I tried to aim and I was shaking,” Qureshy, 18, said to her teammates shortly after winning the women’s competition.
Khadijah’s victory over the rest of the professional female competitors was a sign of how archery, a sport deeply rooted in history and heritage, has been thriving with the younger generation. It is among the fastest-growing sports in Turkey, tripling in participation every year, according to Hasan Oz, sports director of the Okcular Vakfi. It’s unclear if this growth will last. That depends on the dedication of young participants like Deniz Silab, 6 (below), who began practicing archery as soon as she could walk.
As the archers packed their quivers, traditional Ottoman music played over the sound system, signaling the end of the competition. While the speakers were new, it was yet another indicator that not much had changed in this sport since the conquest of Constantinople 500 years ago.