President Trump is transforming the study of constitutional law.
The nation’s law professors have spent the summer revising their courses to take account of a president who generates fresh constitutional questions by the tweet. When classes start in the coming weeks, law students will be studying more than dusty doctrine. They will also be considering an array of pressing questions.
When is firing a subordinate to thwart an investigation obstruction of justice? Can a sitting president be indicted? Can the president pardon himself? May he accept financial benefits from foreign governments? Are his campaign statements evidence of religious bias? Must Congress authorize a nuclear strike against North Korea?
“It would be easy to design a whole course or write an entire book about the constitutional issues raised in just the first six months of the Trump presidency,” said Jay D. Wexler, a law professor at Boston University.
Constitutional scholars sounded both anxious and energized by these developments.
“Teaching the Constitution has never felt more urgent, like unraveling a mix of ‘Apocalypse Now’ and ‘Alice in Wonderland,’ but with the highest possible stakes,” said Laurence H. Tribe, a law professor at Harvard and vocal critic of Mr. Trump, who also represents plaintiffs challenging foreign payments to Mr. Trump’s companies. Many law professors, including several quoted in this column, have signed briefs opposing Mr. Trump’s actions.
Generations of law students have grappled with the same basic issues in their constitutional law classes: the separation of powers, federalism, the Bill of Rights, equal protection, due process. Mr. Trump, a one-man course in constitutional arcana, is supplementing that curriculum with some seldom-examined provisions of the Constitution.
At least one of those curious provisions is suddenly salient. Professor Wexler devoted a chapter to the president’s power to bypass the Senate by making recess appointments. Mr. Trump might test that power should he try to replace Attorney General Jeff Sessions with someone prepared to fire Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel investigating ties between the Trump campaign and Russia.
Then there were the clauses that were too obscure even for Professor Wexler.
“I don’t think anyone even knew how to pronounce the word ‘emoluments,’ much less know what it might mean, before Trump took office,” Professor Wexler said. Now there are several lawsuits challenging payments to Mr. Trump’s companies as violations of the Constitution’s two emoluments clauses, which bar federal officials from accepting compensation from foreign governments or payments from the federal government or the states beyond their salaries.
Sanford V. Levinson, a law professor at the University of Texas, said Mr. Trump’s presidency had revealed some shortcomings of the Constitution. For instance, he said, the framers should have made it easier to remove the president before his term was over.
Justice Antonin Scalia, who died last year, used to say there was more to a constitution than its words. “Every banana republic in the world has a bill of rights,” he told the Senate Judiciary Committee in 2011.
Legal scholars around the nation said the nation might soon decide whether its sacred founding charter was built to last.
David Strauss, a law professor at the University of Chicago, said he had been trying recently to convey that unsettled state of constitutional law to his students.
The sudden relevance of constitutional law is harrowing and heartening to people who have spent their careers studying and teaching it, said Vikram D. Amar, dean of the University of Illinois College of Law.
