Times Insider|Where Were You During the Great American Eclipse of 2017?
Where Were You During the Great American Eclipse of 2017?
As an eerie midday twilight settled over Baker, Ore., on June 8, 1918, the hearts of a group of astronomers began to sink. Clouds became dense, and their chance to watch the sun wink out was in jeopardy.
Later this month the same quiet could fall again. On Aug. 21 the earth, moon and sun will align, creating the first solar eclipse since 1918 to sweep across the contiguous United States, coast to coast. It will also be the first to be seen only in the U.S. since the signing of the Declaration of Independence; NASA has even billed the event as this generation’s moon landing.
“It’s really a wholly American eclipse,” said Fred Guterl, the editor at The Times Magazine who oversaw a special print-only section to commemorate the event and to prepare the curious. An array of first-person accounts, explainers on the science and historical anecdotes, the section, in the Sunday paper, takes a full-service approach. It includes a procrastinator’s guide to spectating, for instance, alongside a contemplative essay on what it’s like to be one among millions swallowed by the moon’s umbra at once.
When the hour comes, Mr. Guterl said he would be in Carbondale, Ill., which will experience the longest period of darkness, about two minutes and 38 seconds. “Something about seeing it go over actual places in the country, I thought, I’ve got to get to one of them,” he said.
This is the fifth print-only section produced by The Times Magazine in the last year, and like the others, it is meant to “surprise and delight” print readers, the magazine’s editor, Jake Silverstein, said.
“It’s our attempt to convince as many people who either may not have yet known about the eclipse or haven’t made plans, that this event is so magical and awe inspiring that they need to figure out a way to get into the path of totality,” Mr. Silverstein said, using the term for the regions for which the moon’s shadow will occlude the sun completely.
Mr. Guterl was evangelized himself when he looked at a map of the eclipse’s path and realized the breadth of the shadow: Just after 9 a.m. P.D.T., its path will cut from just outside Portland, Ore. to Charleston, S.C., and viewers as far west as Alaska and as far east as New Hampshire will be able to see a partial eclipse.
In fact, a global community of eclipse chasers travels the world to watch, no matter the stakes; they’ll fly to the start of the eclipse and drive the path’s entire length. “People are making maps about this, several books are out about this,” said Nicholas St. Fleur, a Times science reporter, who spoke to astronomers, solar physicists and even a few chasers while researching data collection opportunities for eclipse observers.
“A lady I spoke to at the tourism office in Carbondale told me people have called from Japan, Germany and South America, all looking for tickets to this show,” Mr. St. Fleur said.
Mr. St. Fleur will also be in Carbondale, as the only Times reporter officially on assignment. He’ll join thousands in a stadium at Southern Illinois University, interviewing enthusiasts and scientists as they observe an event that will not recur until 2024. “I’m sure there will be science journalists a hundred years from now who will look at how The New York Times covered the Great American Eclipse of Aug. 21, 2017,” he said.
Many have already ascribed their own portents to the eclipse, and some may see its arrival at this moment in American history as more than coincidence. But Ms. Macdonald cautioned against seeing signs.
