Let others speak of their winters of discontent. Big city dwellers know it’s at the tail end of summer that life really turns rancid — when heat clogs the veins, resentment festers and the sun itself seems to be asking for a punch in the kisser.
Especially this year, when rancor is the default mode of the national conversation. And if you’re stuck in the grimy sweat box called New York City — and besieged by headlines about world leaders behaving like playground bullies — your primal instinct may well be to reach out and hit someone.
Of course, you could try singing instead.
That was the alternative proposed by “Primer for a Failed Superpower,” a concert held at the minimally air-conditioned Roulette performance space in Brooklyn on Tuesday night (with a second, final performance scheduled for Wednesday). This production from the experimental theater troupe the Team assembled a diverse throng of performers (and a crowd of more than 500) to raise their voices in protest songs of yesterday, today and tomorrow.
There was also that moment when an extraordinary singer and composer named Amy Leon (who sang Bob Dylan’s “Ballad of Hollis Brown”) asked the audience to breathe in and breathe out, breathe in and breathe out, and then, finally, yell as loud as it could on the exhale. Prettier sounds were heard that night, but that collective scream best summed up the experience.
Directed by the eclectic and inventive Rachel Chavkin (whose credits include “Natasha, Pierre & the Great Comet of 1812” now on Broadway), the first performance of “Primer for a Failed Superpower” became an active testament to the art of overcoming in ways its creators presumably hadn’t anticipated. A failed air-conditioning system guaranteed that the heat was all too, well, oppressive.
So the show registered as an improbable act of summoning and sustaining vitality under energy-sapping conditions. The cast members — a multishaped, multicolored and multigendered mix of professionals and civilians, whose ages appeared to range from the teens to the far side of 70 — were often required to stand (and sing, shout and dance) shoulder to sweaty shoulder. After all, one of the primary messages was that in union there is strength. At the end, Ms. Chavkin took the stage to announce that there was pizza (“not enough for a lot for everyone, but enough for a little for everyone”) and to encourage the audience to return to hear about community service programs.
The idea would appear to be that it is up to you (sorry, us) to fill in the blank as to what kind of future awaits. Video clips of interviews with left-leaning political activists of varying ages and focus punctuated the show, emphasizing the necessity of political engagement and the idea that anger does not have to be a dirty word or a negative emotion.
The music (supervised by Orion Stephanie Johnstone and directed by Nehemiah Luckett) was highly amplified, strong on percussion and surprisingly harmonious throughout. The songs (newly arranged by artists who included Justin Ellington, Yva Las Vegass, and Stew and Heidi Rodewald) covered a historical spectrum of styles, a reminder that singing truth to power is a venerable American tradition.
But the tunes they are a-changin’. Concerns that would never have figured in a Weavers’ protest concert in the 1950s — such as the rights of trans people and the freedom to choose your own gender — were clearly much on the minds of the ensemble, particularly its younger members.
A group-sing of “Teen Spirit” followed. “Hello?” asked the performers again and again, in an ecstasy of confrontational vigor. “Here we are now. Entertain us!” If the lyrics remained enigmatic, the conviction in the voices could not have been louder or clearer.