Those were the admonishments to President Trump from a 12-person focus group, an effort on Tuesday night in Pittsburgh to test the mood of registered voters after the president’s first seven months in office.
The focus group, conducted by Peter D. Hart, a veteran pollster, was commissioned by Emory University and featured five Democrats, four independents and three Republicans. Five voted for Mr. Trump, six for Hillary Clinton and one for Jill Stein, the Green Party candidate.
Mr. Hart asked the group members, seven men and five women, how they felt about the direction of the country, and the response was largely pessimistic. One man said the country was “more divisive” now than it has been since the Civil War.
Only two additional people shared that view. But in general, the group expressed disappointment and even exasperation with how Mr. Trump has handled his time in office.
“His learning curve has been a little disappointing,” said David Turner, a Republican who said his impulse was still to give Mr. Trump and other officials more of a chance so early in a term.
Someone in the group described Mr. Trump as lacking in empathy. Another said the president is “dividing the country with Twitter. Tweet after tweet after tweet. And he openly lies with misinformation based on Twitter.” And another attendee said the president uses Twitter as a “weapon” against enemies.
One group member insisted Mr. Trump is not a racist, a claim his critics have made and which his allies have denounced. But the person said the president “feeds off” racial divisions.
“I guess I question what he’s trying to do, and don’t fully understand it,” said Russell Stitt, a Republican who voted for Mr. Trump.
Focus groups are not replicas of polling data, and they represent only a snapshot of views. That is a fact pointed out by Tony Sciullo, a Republican-leaning independent who voted for Mr. Trump.
“I surely am not his base,” Mr. Sciullo said, calling himself an “anti-Hillary voter” and adding that Mr. Trump has a strong base that was not factored into the attendees. If any of them “were in this room, they would be vociferously defending him,” Mr. Sciullo said.
Christina Lees, an independent who leans Republican and voted for Mr. Trump, declared that “everybody knew he was a nut,” but that they hoped for him to achieve good things when they backed him.
It’s “time to become professional,” she said.
“I look to a president to be presidential,” he said, adding that Mr. Trump had started playing aggressively toward his political base almost exclusively.
Unlike much of Pennsylvania, a state that Mr. Trump won, Allegheny County, where Pittsburgh is, went for Mrs. Clinton. But the state’s working-class demographic is indicative of where Mr. Trump could find broader support, and of some national political trends.
The group was also asked to engage in so-called lightning rounds in which they were to characterize people related to the Trump administration.
