Re “White Nationalist Protest Leads to Deadly Violence” (front page, Aug. 13): The rally in Charlottesville, Va., riven by rage and terror, recalled the tempests of brutality and bigotry throughout the South in the civil rights era.
After Barack Obama’s election, many mistakenly hoped and believed that racial strife would soon become a historical aberration. But less than a decade later, white supremacists are updating the still-unsettled civil rights disputes for the digital era.
WAYNE TRUJILLO, LAKEWOOD, COLO.
After 9/11, the evolutionary biologist Stephen Jay Gould wrote an Op-Ed article in The Times in which he said that after a shocking and dramatic act of destruction, people draw the false conclusion that evil in the world far outweighs the good.
This wasn’t true then and it isn’t true now. Much greater than the hate-filled white supremacists in Charlottesville were the many who objected, those who ministered to the wounded, the heartsick citizens of that city who were aghast at the belligerent interlopers and the thousands across the country looking on with dismay.
There will always be some people who love to hate, but it is a dwindling percentage. They are the least of us, in number and influence.
Re “Virginia Town Is on Edge Over Confederate Statue” (news article, Aug. 12): If embattled factions in this conflicted country are ever to be at peace with one another, considerations must be given to more than one side.
In the case of the Charlottesville statue of Gen. Robert E. Lee, whose planned removal sparked Saturday’s violent rally, the city’s recent renaming of Lee Park as Emancipation Park is a constructive step toward greater inclusiveness.
As a next step, I suggest that the Lee statue, representing the past and the sword, be allowed to stay, but facing a new statue of the African-American abolitionist Frederick Douglass, representing the future and the pen. Children in the park can then consider which is the more promising force in our civilization.
The writer is professor emeritus at the University of California, Berkeley.
Now that there may be a space for a new monument in Charlottesville, Va., I suggest one to Heather Heyer, the young woman killed while protesting the rally of white nationalists, who died for values most Americans hold dear.
Yelling “fire” in a public setting is against the law because the mayhem that follows is caused by the caller, not by the people in the crowd who respond.
It seems reasonable to include in such taboos proclamations in public settings stating that one race, nationality, religion, sex or orientation is superior to all others. Civic order is protected and free speech is not endangered when “fire” and “supremacies” are prohibited.
Clearly the Civil War is not over for many. How is it that mayors, governors and many other elected officials understand this, but the president doesn’t seem to?
President Trump made the right decision to use the words “racism,” “neo-Nazis” and “white supremacists” in his speech on Monday (“Trump, Saying ‘Racism Is Evil,’ Condemns Violence in Charlottesville,” nytimes.com, Aug. 14). But our injured nation waited two very long days to hear him acknowledge the truth. His initial statements deepened the pain of millions. Regrettably, he missed the opportunity to help us heal just when it mattered most.
A president is elected to lead, not to follow.
