Secretary of State Rex Tillerson sought to reassure Americans about North Korea today, after a recent exchange of threats between Pyongyang and President Trump.
“Nothing I have seen and nothing I know of would indicate that the situation has dramatically changed in the last 24 hours,” said Mr. Tillerson, who was returning from Asia. He made the comments during a refueling stop in Guam, the U.S. territory that North Korea warned that it might strike.
Tensions with Pyongyang have escalated into perhaps the most serious foreign policy challenge yet for Mr. Trump.
The columnists behind our Interpreter newsletter give five reasons things aren’t as frightening as you might think, and we answered some questions about how we got here.
• Manafort’s home is searched.
F.B.I. investigators recently searched a home of Paul Manafort, President Trump’s former campaign chief, as part of the special inquiry on Russia, according to a person briefed on the matter.
“Mr. Manafort has consistently cooperated with law enforcement and other serious inquiries and did so on this occasion as well,” his spokesman said.
• Driver is sought after attack near Paris.
Six soldiers were wounded this morning after a car plowed into them outside a building they were using as a barracks in a northwestern suburb.
None of their injuries appeared to be life-threatening.
• It’s hot out there.
That’s one of our nine takeaways from a federal report that says global warming is already having a large effect in the U.S.
The report could force President Trump — who has called climate change “a hoax” — to choose between his administration’s scientists and his conservative supporters.
The White House said on Tuesday that it was reviewing the document. You can read it here.
• Culture wars reach Silicon Valley.
Advocates of women in technology have praised Google for firing a software engineer who wrote a memo challenging the company’s diversity efforts.
But for the right, the move symbolizes the industry’s intolerance of ideological diversity.
• Tensions in Africa.
The Kenyan opposition leader, Raila Odinga, threw early results of the presidential election into doubt today, claiming that the electoral commission’s servers had been hacked to award the incumbent, Uhuru Kenyatta, a significant lead.
In South Africa, President Jacob Zuma survived a no-confidence motion, although by a much narrower margin than expected.
In today’s show, we try to interpret the latest escalation in the tensions with North Korea.
Listen on a computer, an iOS device or an Android device.
• Fox News and 21st Century Fox declined $60 million worth of settlements in several disputes, including gender- and racial-discrimination lawsuits, two people familiar with the matter told us.
• The danger that the U.S. faces with low-skilled immigrants is in not having them, our economics columnist writes.
• U.S. stocks were down on Tuesday. Here’s a snapshot of global markets.
• We tested gear for grinding and brewing coffee. Here are the results.
• Recipe of the day: Try Craig Claiborne’s smothered chicken recipe, a hit since 1983.
• Street art in South America.
In today’s 360 video, join a graffiti tour in Bogotá, Colombia.
Join a graffiti tour on a trip through Bogotá, where the form has evolved into a mixture of social commentary, cultural expression and art.CreditCredit...Nathan Griffiths/The New York Times. Technology by Samsung.
Writers from across the political spectrum discuss North Korea.
Glen Campbell sold an estimated 45 million records and had numerous hits on the pop and country charts in the 1960s and ’70s, including “Southern Nights” and “Rhinestone Cowboy.” He was 81.
Barbara Cook was a Tony Award-winning leading lady in Broadway musicals of the 1950s and ’60s who overcame alcoholism to reinvent herself as a cabaret singer. She was 89.
• Bill Murray relives a role.
Mr. Murray was watching the Broadway musical, based on the 1993 movie in which he starred, for the first time — or did it just feel that way? Our reporter was there.
Like most people who follow the news closely, Stephen Colbert had a lot on his mind on Tuesday.
And if you’ve missed David Letterman, he’s returning in a new series on Netflix.
— State Representative Byron Cook, the Republican chairman of the House State Affairs Committee, who has refused to call a hearing during a special session of the Texas Legislature on a bill restricting transgender bathroom use.
Given the option, most prospective countries favor national sovereignty. Singapore, which became independent of Malaysia on this day in 1965, may be the only modern exception.
Colonized by Britain in the 19th century, the island city achieved self-governance in 1959.
A few years later, in 1963, Singapore merged with a federation of Malay states to establish Malaysia.
But amid political, ethnic and economic tensions, Malaysia’s prime minister, Tunku Abdul Rahman, declared Singapore’s separation in 1965.
He went on to pursue a neutral foreign policy, careful not to upset the country’s larger, more populous neighbors.
Survive it did, and prosper, too. Singapore often appears near the top of quality-of-life rankings in Asia.
If you’re interested in Singapore, a recent cartoon provides an alternative history of the city-state. And here are five places to visit.
Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning. You can browse through past briefings here.
You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox. Check out our full range of free newsletters here.