HONG KONG — Three prominent young leaders of Hong Kong’s democracy movement were sentenced Thursday to six to eight months in prison, a severe setback for the semiautonomous Chinese city in its struggle for greater political freedom under Communist Party rule.
Joshua Wong, the face of huge street demonstrations in 2014 for freer elections of Hong Kong’s leader, was sentenced to six months in prison. Two fellow protest leaders, Nathan Law and Alex Chow, were given eight and seven months, respectively.
The sentences risked casting the three young men as Hong Kong’s first prisoners of conscience, undermining the city’s reputation as a haven of civil liberties with special status in China.
Originally sentenced to community service and a suspended jail term, the three activists were given the prison sentences by an appeals court after the Beijing-backed local government successfully pushed for harsher punishments. By law, the prison terms left them ineligible for public office for five years.
After the sentences were announced, Mr. Wong posted a series of defiant messages on Twitter saying that he would not give up his fight for democracy. All three were taken into custody immediately.
They all intend to appeal their sentences, according to Lester Shum, a fellow protest leader, who read a statement outside the court.
Mr. Wong and Mr. Chow were found guilty last year of unlawful assembly, while Mr. Law was found guilty of inciting people to take part in the assembly. The charges stemmed from the storming of a fenced government square in 2014 to protest Beijing’s strict limits on proposed reforms to the way Hong Kong elects its top leader, or chief executive.
The protests and the police response cascaded into weeks of sit-ins, later known as the Umbrella Movement, that paralyzed several major streets across Hong Kong but failed to win the protesters any political concessions.
The former British colony returned to Chinese rule 20 years ago under a “one country, two systems” governing principle that promised a high degree of autonomy. Yet the public’s trust in the political firewall has eroded as the Chinese authorities appear ever more assertive in exercising their will in the city.
Last year, the Chinese government moved to unseat two dissident lawmakers elected in Hong Kong’s only citywide direct elections, ostensibly because they deviated from the official text when taking the oath of office. Last month, four more opposition lawmakers were removed from the city’s 70-member Legislative Council, including Mr. Law, who was elected last year as the city’s youngest-ever legislator.
A lower court had previously avoided deterrent punishment for Mr. Wong, Mr. Law and Mr. Chow, citing their “genuine wish to express their political ideals and concerns for society.” But prosecutors argued that lenient sentences would send the wrong message as they pursued legal action against even more participants and leaders of the largely peaceful protests.
In 2014, Joshua Wong was at the forefront of a student movement for democracy in Hong Kong.
The three judges at the appeals court were in agreement that tougher sentences were warranted in order to deter unlawful protests.
The Hong Kong police arrested more than 900 people during the demonstrations in 2014, when thousands of protesters shut down streets in several major business districts for almost three months. The government has brought charges against fewer than one-tenth of them, and those found guilty have been mostly sentenced to probation or community service.
The sentencing of the three protest leaders capped an emotional week for the city’s embattled democracy activists, with one Democratic Party member being accused on Tuesday of falsifying an account of abduction and torture by Chinese agents.
On the same day, prison sentences of eight to 13 months were handed down to more than a dozen people who had stormed the Legislative Council building in June 2014 in opposition to a government development plan.
Those protesters included members of the Demosisto party formed by Mr. Law and Mr. Wong last year. At a news conference on Tuesday, Mr. Law broke down in tears while expressing his support for them.
On Wednesday, the night before the sentencing, others wept for Mr. Law, as he and Mr. Wong addressed hundreds of supporters gathered outside the square where they protested in 2014.
