When the police arrived, Jennifer Jackson’s body lay on her bedroom floor in the brick home she owned in a well-kept Memphis neighborhood. Noura’s mother, a 39-year-old successful investment banker, had been stabbed 50 times. The brutal violence on a quiet block made local headlines, generating shock and anxiety in the middle-­class corners of the city.
The police began their investigation with few leads. Jackson lived alone with her only child, Noura, who was 18 at the time. She had divorced Noura’s father when Noura was a baby. Investigators found broken glass on the kitchen floor, from a windowpane in the door that led from the garage to the kitchen. But the window seemed to have been broken from the inside, because the hole it made lined up with a door lock that could be seen only from the kitchen. And no one had seen an intruder. The police questioned Jackson’s on-­again-­off-­again boyfriend. He called her around midnight on the night she was killed but told the police that he hung up before she answered and then went to sleep at his home, more than an hour from Memphis.
The police also questioned Noura. She said she found her mother’s body when she came home after being out all night. She had gone to a couple of parties with friends and then drove around by herself, stopping at a gas station and a Taco Bell.
With concern about the case mounting — ‘‘Mystery Stabbing Death Unsolved,’’ local ABC news reported that August — the case went to Amy Weirich, who at 40 was a rising star in the Memphis prosecutor’s office. A long-­distance runner and the mother of four children, Weirich was a former chief of the gang-­and-­narcotics unit and the first woman to be named deputy district attorney in Shelby County. She was considered a highly skilled trial lawyer.
Studying the case, she developed a theory: Noura was bridling under her mother’s rules and killed her for money that she could use to keep partying with her friends. Jackson’s estate was valued at $1.5 million, including a life insurance policy. Weirich also argued that Noura and her mother were struggling over whether to sell a few cars that Noura inherited from her father, Nazmi Hassanieh, a former Lebanese Army captain. After a long separation, Noura got back in touch with her father when she was 16, and he texted and called her often. Sixteen months before her mother was killed, Hassanieh was shot to death in a Memphis convenience store he owned. His murder was never solved.
The police came to arrest Noura that September as she was finishing up a babysitting job. She had no history of violence, and the case quickly became a local sensation. Weirich asked for a life sentence. The judge, Chris Craft, eventually set a bond of $500,000. Unable to pay, Noura spent a total of three and a half years in jail awaiting trial, on a heavy regimen of anti-­anxiety and antidepressant medication.
Noura’s private lawyer, Valerie Corder, thought Weirich’s case was weak. At the time of Noura’s indictment, the police were waiting for the DNA results from samples taken from the blood spattered around Jackson’s bedroom. When the results came back, they suggested that two or three people, whose identities were unknown to the police, had been in Jackson’s bedroom. Noura’s DNA was excluded as a match for any of the three DNA profiles. But Weirich dismissed the absence of Noura’s DNA. The DNA results ‘‘didn’t point to anything, as DNA often doesn’t,’’ she told me in an interview this past spring. No physical evidence ever linked Noura to the killing.
Noura’s trial aired live on Court TV in February 2009. Over two weeks, Weirich called witness after witness to portray Noura as rebellious and angry. One neighbor said that in the weeks before the murder, she overheard Noura demanding money from her mother ‘‘in a rage.’’ Noura’s half uncle said he heard Noura and her mother arguing over the cars. An aunt said Noura grew sullen when Jackson talked about sending her to boarding school and testing her for drugs. At the time of the trial, two of Noura’s aunts and the half uncle were suing her for the value of her mother’s life insurance policy and the rest of her estate.
Weirich and Stephen Jones, a second prosecutor who assisted at the trial, also introduced several witnesses who described Noura’s partying, sex life and drug use (mostly alcohol, marijuana and the opioid Lortab, which she was prescribed when she was 16 for pain she experienced from endometriosis, a disorder of the uterine tissue). Much of the testimony was tangential to Jackson’s death, but Judge Craft made the questionable decision to allow it, giving Weirich the chance to paint a picture of a teenager spinning out of control.
The prosecution presented a great deal of testimony about a small cut on Noura’s left hand, covered with adhesive tape between her thumb and forefinger, on the morning Jackson was killed. Asked how she got the cut, Noura gave differing explanations to friends and her aunts and half uncle, they told the jury. The police testified that in her initial statement about where she was in the early morning hours when Jackson was killed, Noura did not mention a stop she made around 4 a.m. at Walgreens. The jury saw grainy video footage of her buying bandages and skin-care products.
The jury deliberated for nine hours and then filed back into the courtroom.  She tried to make eye contact with some of the jurors, but they avoided her gaze. When she heard the words ‘‘guilty of second-­degree murder,’’ her head fell.
Five days after the jury found Noura guilty in 2009, Stephen Jones, the assistant prosecutor on the case, filed a motion to submit an ‘‘omitted’’ statement — a handwritten note that Andrew Hammack, Noura’s friend, gave to the police in the early days of the murder investigation. Jones later said he received Hammack’s note from the police in the middle of the trial, tucked it into a flap of his notebook intending to give it to Corder and then forgot about it until he put away his notebook after the case ended.
In the note, Hammack wrote that on the night of Jackson’s death, he left his cellphone with a friend and later was ‘‘rolling on XTC,’’ a reference to the drug also known as Ecstasy or Molly. Corder, who asked Weirich and Jones repeatedly before and during the trial if they had given her all the state’s information related to Hammack, believed that the note raised questions about Hammack’s credibility that she would have raised during the trial. Based in large part on the newly disclosed evidence, Corder appealed Noura’s conviction to the Tennessee Supreme Court.
On Aug. 22, 2014, the Tennessee Supreme Court unanimously overturned Noura’s conviction. ‘‘It is difficult to overstate the importance of this portion of Mr. Hammack’s testimony,’’ the justices wrote, pointing out that no DNA evidence linked Noura to the crime scene and that the ‘‘blood of unknown individuals’’ was ‘‘present in the victim’s bed.’’ Hammack’s note suggested that he might not have told the truth when he testified that Noura called and asked him to meet her at her house, the justices said. (Cellphone records showed that Hammack texted Noura and that she called him, but they did not show the content of the texts or whether he answered the call. Hammack did not respond to repeated requests for comment.) The court also explained how Noura’s lawyer could have used the note to argue ‘‘that Mr. Hammack himself was a plausible suspect.’’ The note contradicted Hammack’s alibi, opening a line of inquiry about his whereabouts when Jackson was killed. And it cast in a new light a visit Hammack’s friends made to the Memphis police station a week after Jackson’s murder, which Corder tried to explore at the trial. The friends reported that they didn’t know where Hammack was that night and that he had been acting strangely since then. The police didn’t pursue the lead.
The Tennessee Supreme Court called Jones and Weirich’s failure to disclose Hammack’s note before trial a ‘‘flagrant violation’’ of Noura’s constitutional rights. The justices also overturned the verdict against Noura for another reason — Weirich’s closing exclamation in front of the jury demanding: ‘‘Just tell us where you were! That’s all we are asking, Noura!’’ The Constitution’s protection of the right to remain silent means that a defendant’s decision not to testify ‘‘should be considered off limits to any conscientious prosecutor,’’ the Tennessee justices wrote, so that the jury doesn’t view it as an implicit admission of guilt. Weirich was ‘‘doubtless well ­aware’’ of the rule, the justices added in a striking footnote, citing three previous cases in which appellate judges criticized her and her office for making prejudicial statements to the jury.
Over the next century, however, the British courts changed course, joining countries like Germany and France to require broad disclosure of the prosecution’s case before trial, including a full list of witnesses, a summary of how they would testify and other investigative material, like police and lab reports. The nascent justice system in the United States, by contrast, imported Britain’s earlier rules. Judges in this country emphasized that defendants might harm or intimidate witnesses if they knew they were planning to testify.
In March 1963, Justice William J. Brennan Jr., an Eisenhower appointee who became one of the era’s leading liberal jurists, criticized the American practice of keeping the prosecution’s case secret before trial in a major speech at Washington University’s law school. Brennan argued that it was ‘‘particularly ironic’’ that at the Nuremberg trials, conducted in the late 1940s to bring Nazi war criminals to justice, Soviet prosecutors protested the American rules of evidence as unfair to defendants. Isn’t denying access to the facts of the prosecution’s case ‘‘blind to the superlatively important public interest in the acquittal of the innocent?’’ Brennan asked.
Brennan’s speech was part of a sweeping argument for criminal-­justice reform. Led by Earl Warren, the consensus-­seeking California governor chosen as chief justice by Eisenhower, the court revolutionized the process the government must follow to convict someone of a crime. The Warren Court gave poor defendants the right to a free lawyer, barred police officers from coercing confessions and required them to inform defendants of their rights (the Miranda warning).
The Brady ruling appeared to rebalance the scales between the defense and the prosecution, as British and European courts began doing a century and a half earlier. For years, however, little attention was paid to enforcing the Brady rule, in part because there was little proof it was being broken. Prosecutors decide what counts as ‘‘material’’ or ‘‘favorable’’ — in the heat of battle — while the judge and the defense have no way to see what they’re holding back. It’s as if prosecutors are tennis players calling their own lines when their opponents, and even the referee, can’t see the other side of the court.
It was only in the 1990s, with the advent of DNA testing, that defense lawyers gained insight into how often prosecutors broke the rules by failing to disclose evidence. As courts reopened old cases in light of DNA evidence, files sometimes revealed telltale evidence of innocence — facts that pointed to another suspect or undermined the credibility of a witness, which, it turned out, the state possessed all along and never shared. The lead authors of a 2002 study, James Liebman and Jeffrey Fagan of Columbia Law School, reviewed some 2,700 death sen­tences across the country. They found that 351 convictions were ultimately overturned in state appellate courts and that in about 20 percent of those cases, the state failed to disclose evidence. ‘‘Our analyses reveal that it is in close cases — those in which a small amount of evidence might tip the outcome in a different direction — that the risk of serious error is the greatest,’’ Liebman and Fagan wrote, raising the chilling possibility that prosecutors could be more likely to withhold evidence when proof of guilt was uncertain.
The training and supervision of new prosecutors is especially crucial for instilling values. ‘‘It’s disturbing when a prosecutor with a history of failing to disclose evidence has the job of overseeing the next generation of lawyers,’’ says Ronald Wright, a law professor at Wake Forest and co-­author of a published study based on more than 250 interviews with prosecutors.
When Weirich took office, the director of criminal-­trial prosecutors was Tom Henderson, a longtime Shelby County prosecutor who had won major trials and helped her rise through the ranks. Henderson supervised about 50 less-­experienced lawyers, though in two death-­penalty cases in the 2000s, courts found that Henderson did not give the defense all the evidence he should have. (In one case, the result was a mistrial, and the defendant was later acquitted. In the other, the judge found that the nondisclosures were unintentional and didn’t affect the verdict.) Then in the 2012 reversal of the murder conviction of a man named Michael Rimmer, a judge went further, finding that Henderson ‘‘purposefully misled’’ the defense about an eyewitness who identified an alternate suspect in a photo spread. Henderson said he simply forgot about the eyewitness identification. Still, the judge’s finding led to a public censure, in 2013, from the Tennessee Board of Professional Responsibility, an arm of the Tennessee Supreme Court.
After Noura’s conviction was overturned in 2014, other questions arose about Weirich’s past practices at trial. Later that year, a judge ordered Weirich to testify about a murder case she tried in 2005, in which a man named Vern Braswell was convicted of killing his wife. On appeal, a defense attorney and a prosecutor who was new to the case found a manila envelope in the files. It was labeled with a sticky note, which the lawyers said read something along the lines of ‘‘do not turn over to defense’’ and was signed with Weirich’s initials. When they later returned to the files to look inside the envelope, it was gone. In her testimony, Weirich denied knowing anything about the envelope. A Tennessee judge ruled last year that there was no reason to grant a new trial because the ‘‘unavailability’’ of any documents probably didn’t prevent Braswell from presenting an effective defense.
Weirich and Jones were compelled to testify privately last winter in a challenge of a murder conviction in a capital-­punishment case. This one involved the discovery of a letter, not given to the defense at trial, in which a gang member said the defendant had been framed. Weirich’s and Jones’s statements about the letter are not yet public.
Noura wanted to explain that she hadn’t told the police about stopping at Walgreens to buy skin-care products and bandages for the cut on her hand because she didn’t think it was important. She cut her hand on a broken beer bottle while she was drinking with friends the Friday night before her mother died, she says, and her mother bought the first package of bandages, jotting down the item on a shopping list, which the jury didn’t see because Judge Craft questioned its authenticity. One former friend testified, on cross-­examination, that Noura asked for a bandage at a party on Saturday night. Noura also had an acrylic-­tipped manicure, visible in photos taken at the party. The police said Jackson had fought back against her attacker, but Noura’s manicure was in perfect condition the next morning, according to pictures taken at the police station. And if Noura cut her hand killing her mother, wouldn’t blood from her cut have been found in the spattered bedroom?
Though Noura didn’t want to shame her mother, she also wondered whether her mother’s volatile relationships with men were connected to her killing. Jackson married for a second time when Noura was in elementary school. The relationship turned abusive and violent by the time it ended in 2001, according to Noura’s half uncle, who testified that Jackson’s ex-­husband even brought a gun to the divorce negotiations. In the months before her death, Jackson was going out to bars and picking up strangers. Did one of those encounters go wrong? The jury had no inkling of that possibility.
Then there was the unsolved murder of Noura’s father, which also went unexplored at trial. At the time of his death in January 2004, Hassanieh was running a limousine service that ferried clients to and from a strip club next to his convenience store. When he was killed in the store, surveillance video showed the assailant ransacking the place, as if he was looking for something. Rumors swirled that Hassanieh was renting out limos to a prostitution ring and had compromising videotapes of clients who had ridden in his cars. Jennifer Jackson had collected Hassanieh’s belongings from the store for Noura. Their home was also ransacked the night of Jackson’s murder, according to the police.
Noura knew that her friends in prison would feel as though a guilty plea was an act of betrayal. She felt that way herself. But she was also deeply torn. Her friends outside prison urged her to seize the chance to get out. Ansley Larsson, a friend of her mother’s, invited Noura to live in her home after she was released.
On May 20, 2015, wearing her prison uniform, an orange top and navy pants, Noura was taken to a courtroom. A bailiff she met when she was arrested at 18 took off her handcuffs so she could sign an Alford plea that her lawyers had negotiated, which allows a defendant to acknowledge that the state has enough evidence to convict her while she maintains her innocence. Noura remembers feeling detached from herself, as if she were performing the part of a person about to be released from prison.
Recently, however, a number of district attorneys have acknowledged that there are problems in the system, campaigning on a promise to protect people’s rights. ‘‘My job is about doing justice, and that doesn’t just mean winning convictions,’’ says Eric Gonzalez, the acting district attorney in Brooklyn, who is running for election in the fall.
Some reform-­minded prosecutors have adopted an officewide policy called ‘‘open file,’’ which goes far beyond Brady. Instead of deciding which evidence is favorable and material to guilt or innocence, prosecutors are required to hand over nearly everything in their files so that defense lawyers can see for themselves. The exception is sensitive information, like a victim’s medical record, or names and other identifiers that put a witness at risk. In six states, open-­file practices are the law for all prosecutors. Fifteen states and the federal courts require prosecutors to reveal little. The rest lie somewhere in between.
Open-­file laws, on their own, don’t ensure that criminal justice will be fair. Ben Grunwald, a law professor at Duke who has studied the impact of these laws, calls their promise ‘‘fragile.’’ The police can still home in on one suspect while ignoring other evidence, Grunwald points out in an article published this year in The Connecticut Law Review, and overloaded defense lawyers may not take advantage of the leads the state makes available.
In truth, in many cases, the consequences for withholding evidence are relatively minor. Only a tiny number of prosecutors have been disbarred or jailed for withholding evidence. Last year, the Tennessee Board of Professional Responsibility recommended that Amy Weirich and Stephen Jones accept a public censure for failing to disclose Andrew Hammack’s note in Noura’s trial. The prosecutors said they would stand trial instead. Jones went first, in January. At a two-day hearing, he denied remembering Hammack’s note at critical points in the trial that might have jogged his memory, including Hammack’s testimony and Jones’s use of that testimony in his closing argument. But a panel of three Memphis lawyers, one of whom was a former prosecutor, called Jones’s account ‘‘entirely credible’’ and found him not guilty. Praising the result, Weirich announced that the Tennessee board had agreed to dismiss the charges against her in exchange for a private reprimand.
To Nina Morrison, a lawyer at the Innocence Project who helped represent Michael Morton and now leads an initiative on prosecutorial accountability, the results in Weirich’s and Jones’s cases were disappointing but typical. ‘‘All too often, we see bar committees give prosecutors every benefit of the doubt when they claim that their failures to disclose exculpatory evidence were unintentional,’’ she says.
Weirich’s office continues to be investigated for withholding evidence in other cases, despite an open-­file policy that she formalized in 2015. Last month, the Tennessee board started a new investigation into Weirich’s conduct at Vern Braswell’s trial, prompted by the disappearance of the manila envelope from the prosecution’s files. Defense lawyers and former prosecutors say the office is still not transparent. ‘‘The people who view a trial as a game continue to look for ways to hold things back,’’ one prosecutor who left the office recently told me. ‘‘You can say you have open file, but if the file isn’t complete, it doesn’t really matter,’’ another said.
In June, a federal monitor, Sandra Simkins, who was appointed by the Justice Department in 2012 because of a history of racial disparities and violations of children’s rights in Shelby County’s juvenile court, reported a troubling practice. Prosecutors seeking guilty pleas arbitrarily ask to transfer underage teenagers to adult court without disclosing crucial evidence to the defense, Simkins found. She emphasized the disproportionate impact on black teenagers and the ‘‘extraordinary gravity of the con­se­quences,’’ because transfers to adult court are rarely undone. Weirich denies Simkins’s findings. Over the objection of community groups, Shelby County officials asked the Justice Department last month to end the monitoring of the juvenile court.
Darryl Brown, a University of Virginia law professor who has studied prosecutors’ practices, sees a ‘‘slow but steady march’’ toward greater disclosure, but also resistance rooted in what he thinks of as ‘‘status quo bias.’’ “You’re comfortable with the familiar,’’ he says, ‘‘and you can’t imagine it could work another way.” Increasingly, the quality of justice a person receives depends on the place in which he or she is accused of a crime.
Over the winter, Noura decided to move to Nashville to live with her girlfriend, whom she met in prison. As ex-­felons, they had trouble finding an apartment at first. But when they told one rental agent about their predicament, offering a few months of rent up front, he talked to the landlord and got them into a quiet complex with plenty of greenery and open space.
Noura now works as a receptionist in an auto-­body shop. (The lawsuit her aunts and half uncle brought over her mother’s estate has been resolved.) She has grown close to her girlfriend’s large family. One night in April, while they waited for a pizza delivery, Noura played with her girlfriend’s 3-year-old grandson. She made him a cheese-­and-­mayonnaise sandwich, and then they took turns dropping marshmallows into a cup of hot chocolate.
Nina Morrison, of the Innocence Project, recently agreed to represent Noura in a bid to use DNA advancements over the last decade to determine who killed her mother. Noura jumped at the chance to retest the evidence. ‘‘Because that would open the door back up for the police to go look for somebody,’’ she told me.
We sat on the back patio of her house early the next morning. To distract herself, Noura tapped a kitchen lighter against the arm of her chair: She was trying to quit smoking, an old habit. I told her about a conversation I had with a Memphis judge, Lee Coffee, about her case. In 2005, Coffee was a prosecutor in Shelby County, working alongside Weirich. He read the case file on Jennifer Jackson’s murder at the time Weirich asked the grand jury to indict Noura.
Noura asked to hear the tape of the interview. ‘‘Based on what was in that file, I would not have presented that case for an indictment,’’ Coffee said. The evidence was too thin. ‘‘I would not have prosecuted that case based on the standards I’ve been taught.’’ After hearing his words, Noura looked up, forgetting she was holding the lighter, which fell from her hands. ‘‘It’s going to take me a long time to wrap my head around that,’’ she said.