Movies|Think ‘The Emoji Movie’ Got Bad Reviews? Check Out These Stinkers.
Think ‘The Emoji Movie’ Got Bad Reviews? Check Out These Stinkers.
“The Emoji Movie” finished No. 2 at the domestic box office this past weekend. But it certainly didn’t get there because of strong reviews. Critics loved the No. 1 film, “Dunkirk.” But they hated — truly hated — “The Emoji Movie,” and the film is hovering at a brutal “6 percent fresh” score on the movie-review-aggregator Rotten Tomatoes.
As it turns out, a movie can do worse. At least 10 films on Rotten Tomatoes have received a “0 percent fresh” rating.
Jeff Voris, vice president of Rotten Tomatoes, explained the site’s method: Editors grade reviews of each film as “fresh” or “rotten” based on the overall tone. It’s a subjective process, and occasionally they’re challenged on it.
Below is a closer look at the domestic reception for five movies where the critical consensus was an unbroken string of thumbs down. These films — from the comedies, action and horror genres — share one common denominator: They’re more Razzie-worthy than Oscar-worthy.
The Film: Ecks (Antonio Banderas) and Sever (Lucy Liu) blow things up in this action-movie bomb.
The Box Office: The film had a $70 million budget … but grossed only $14.3 million.
The Film: Roberto Benigni won two Oscars for “Life Is Beautiful.” Then he nearly torpedoed his career with this live-action adaptation of the children’s story.
The Box Office: Released on Christmas Day and received like a lump of coal in a stocking, the film made a total of $3.6 million.
Sample Review: We’re claiming this one. Elvis Mitchell of The New York Times called it “a chunk of pine, but it’s still awaiting the magic touch to transmute it into a real live movie.” And that was one of the nicer things he said.
The Box Office: The film grossed a modest $26.9 million on a reported $20 million budget.
The Film: Eddie Murphy finds a magic tree in his backyard. Whenever he utters a word, the tree loses a leaf and brings him closer to death — so he has to keep mum.
The Box Office: $18.4 million, not exactly “Nutty Professor” numbers.
The Film: Adam Sandler plays a man raised by Native Americans who discovers he has five half brothers. Comedy, apparently, does not ensue.
The Box Office: This is a Netflix Original that skipped theaters. The company generally does not share viewership numbers, but in this case the chief content officer, Ted Sarandos, told the news media that “The Ridiculous 6” was the most watched movie on Netflix during the first 30 days of its release.
