MetLife Stadium, in East Rutherford, N.J., can accommodate well over 50,000 people for a concert. The Walter Kerr Theater on Broadway is a fraction of that size, with room for just under 1,000.
The show, “Springsteen on Broadway,” will run five nights a week, Tuesday to Saturday, at the Walter Kerr, the rose-and-gold-decorated jewel box on West 48th Street that last housed the short-lived “Amélie: A New Musical.” The official opening is set for Oct. 12, and the run is planned through Nov. 26. Preview performances begin on Oct. 3.
In addition to his music, the show will feature Mr. Springsteen, 67, reading excerpts from his 2016 autobiography, “Born to Run,” and performing other spoken reminiscences written for the show.
The show has been perhaps the worst-kept secret on Broadway since news of it leaked in June. But one aspect of it has still held some suspense: How would Mr. Springsteen, who has had well-documented frustrations with scalpers, handle what will surely be a crushing ticket demand?
The answer is Verified Fan, a new technology from Ticketmaster that is meant to weed out bots and high-volume scalpers from the ticketing-buying process. The system, which Ticketmaster has been using since February, asks prospective buyers to register in advance, and checks users’ purchase histories and even social media activity to confirm their legitimacy.
Like everything Ticketmaster does, the system has drawn plenty of gripes online. But the company has been promoting the technology as its best effort to eliminate the plague of online ticket bots, which are now banned by federal law.
According to Ticketmaster, 90 percent of the tickets it has sold through Verified Fan were kept from immediately appearing on secondary markets. But with secondary ticket sales estimated at $8 billion a year, that market may never been fully eliminated.
Ticket registration for “Springsteen on Broadway” begins Wednesday and will close on Aug. 27. Lucky fans will be notified on Aug. 29, and the tickets, priced at $75 to $850, will go on sale the next day.
For Mr. Springsteen, whose last tour with the E Street Band sold an estimated $268 million in tickets around the world, the show’s economics may be less important than the simple lure of playing to fans in close contact. Jon Landau, his longtime manager, said the plans for the show have been in the works since last year.
“Bruce has had this specific idea in mind since last December. It came into focus slowly and then all at once last January,” Mr. Landau said in a statement.
