COPENHAGEN — The mysterious disappearance of a Swedish journalist who vanished after boarding a Danish inventor’s submarine took a dark turn on Monday, when the police revealed that the inventor had changed his account, telling investigators that she died on his vessel and that he had buried her at sea.
The inventor, Peter Madsen, is being held on charges of involuntary manslaughter. He initially told the authorities that he and the journalist, Kim Wall, had gone out on Aug. 10 in his submarine and that he dropped her off back on land in a remote section of the port of Copenhagen later that night.
The next morning, her boyfriend reported her missing, and Mr. Madsen was arrested. A search operation found the sunken vessel in Koge Bay, south of Copenhagen, after Mr. Madsen had plunged into the water and swam toward a boat, his rescuer, a private citizen, said.
Mr. Madsen now asserts that “there was an accident on board which caused Kim Wall’s death and that he consequently buried her at sea,” the Copenhagen police said in a statement on Monday.
The disappearance has riveted Scandinavia, and Mr. Madsen’s new account appeared to raise more questions than it answered: If there had been an accident, why didn’t he call the police? Why didn’t he bring her body to shore? Why did he initially say he had dropped her off on land?
The submarine, the UC3 Nautilus, 55 feet long, was found 22 feet below sea level and was brought ashore shortly after it sank.
Using divers and sonar, the authorities were searching for Ms. Wall’s body along the submarine’s route, north and south of Copenhagen, the police statement said. On Monday evening, the police announced that a woman’s torso had been found on a shore south of Copenhagen.
He added that the torso had been in water for “some time,” and that identifying the body could take days.
Mr. Madsen’s account of Ms. Wall’s death was only disclosed on Monday, with the approval of both the prosecution and the defense, although he had given it in court, behind closed doors, on Aug. 12, a day after his arrest.
Mr. Madsen’s lawyer, Betina Hald Engmark, told the Danish television network TV2 that her client was cooperating with investigators and that he maintained that he was not guilty.
The details were not immediately made public, officials said, to protect the police investigation and out of concern for Ms. Wall’s family. Her relatives have said they believed Ms. Wall, 30, had traveled to Denmark on a reporting assignment.
Friends of Ms. Wall have told local news media that she was about to move to China with her boyfriend. According to her friend and fellow journalist Victoria Greve, writing in the Swedish daily Expressen, Ms. Wall had signed a lease for a small studio apartment in Beijing.
A freelance journalist and a graduate of Columbia University in New York, she had written for a wide range of international publications, including The New York Times.
Ms. Wall had reported on the legacy of Uganda’s torture chambers and on Cuban internet pirates who distributed episodes of “Keeping Up With the Kardashians” without authorization. With Ms. Greve, she reported for Swedish Radio on affluent American women who support President Trump.
Mr. Madsen, 46, is known in Denmark as “Rocket Madsen,” an uncompromising builder of submarines and space rockets who was hoping to become the world’s first amateur space traveler riding in a homemade rocket.
For years he was able to build a community that offered helping hands and raised funds for his projects. But his temper caused conflicts with many of them, Thomas Djursing, a biographer, told BT, a Danish newspaper.
In her Expressen article about Ms. Wall, her colleague, Ms. Greve reflected on how improbable it was that a short day trip to Denmark would end up being the last reporting trip of her friend’s career.
For some Danes, the mystery had the air of the Scandinavian crime thrillers for which the region is known. “This story is endlessly fascinating and as in any good crime novel we find the truth piece by piece,” said Lone Theils, the author of “Fatal Crossing,” a novel about two young girls who go missing on a ferry.
