Brian Aldiss, a former bookseller whose horrific childhood and wartime exploits in Burma kindled a fecund imagination that animated scores of novels, anthologies, memoirs and short stories, like the one that inspired the Steven Spielberg science fiction film “A.I.,” died on Saturday in Oxford, England, hours after celebrating his 92nd birthday.
His death was confirmed by his son Tim Aldiss.
He also found grist in his personal life for autobiographical novels, like “The Hand-Reared Boy” (1970), and memoirs, including “The Twinkling of an Eye: My Life as an Englishman” (1998).
In his memoirs Mr. Aldiss recalled his banishment when he was 6 to a miserable boarding school, where years of brutal bullying were redeemed, he said, by sex in a linen closet with a school matron who seduced him when he was 18.
He fictionalized a tedious job behind a bookstore counter in “The Brightfount Diaries” (1955) and — in a 1970s trilogy that revolved around his alter ego, Horatio Stubbs, and began with “The Hand-Reared Boy” — his escapades as a 19-year-old enlistee in World War II, during which he never saw a Japanese soldier but visited a steamy bordello.
Animated as a child by witnessing an eclipse and discovering the pulp magazine Astounding Science Fiction, he devoured novels by H. G. Wells, Robert Heinlein and later Philip K. Dick (although he said Tolstoy’s “Resurrection” was his favorite novel).
In all, Mr. Aldiss eventually churned out more than 80 books, more than 300 short stories and several volumes of poetry. He also edited some 40 anthologies.
Much of his work resonated with personal memories of rejection and depression.
Brian Wilson Aldiss was born on Aug. 18, 1925, in Dereham, a town in Norfolk, England, to Bill Aldiss and the former Elizabeth Wilson.
His father, who ran a drapery store that he had inherited and that the Aldisses lived above, was a shellshocked World War I veteran who once threatened to drop Brian out a window when he was an infant unless he stopped crying.
Brian was constantly compared with an idolized older sister whom his mother said had died when she was six months old but who, he later learned, had been stillborn.
To escape, he wrote — first to distract his younger sister, he said, then to disarm his schoolmates. 
After he was discharged from the British Army as a signalman, Mr. Aldiss worked at a bookstore in Oxford and married the owner’s secretary, Olive Fortescue. Their marriage ended in divorce several years after he had left his family. A second wife, the former Margaret Manson, died in 1997.
He is survived by two children from his first marriage, Clive and Wendy Aldiss; two from his second marriage, Tim Aldiss and Charlotte Randall; eight grandchildren; and his partner, Alison Soskice.
Once he left the bookstore to write full time, Mr. Aldiss turned out the Helliconia trilogy, about a planet where the cycle of seasons lasts more than 2,000 years, and “Greybeard,” about a world without children after the detonation of nuclear weapons — what is referred to as “The Accident” — renders humans sterile.
Mr. Aldiss, along with J. G. Ballard, Kurt Vonnegut and others, was in the vanguard of writers who invoked science fiction to fathom a modern world that humans for the first time were empowered to completely destroy.
Mr. Aldiss won the two most prestigious awards for science fiction writing, the Hugo and the Nebula, and was named a grandmaster by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Writers of America.
He was also appointed an Officer of the British Empire by Queen Elizabeth II, but he believed that science fiction was more popular in the United States.
He acknowledged that modern technological advances had made writing science fiction more challenging. His last novel, “Comfort Zone” (2013), was about a controversy over a proposed mosque that divides contemporary Oxford.
