Arizona school officials were motivated by racial animus when they acted to shut down a Mexican-American studies program in Tucson’s public schools, a federal judge ruled on Tuesday.
In a 42-page ruling, Judge A. Wallace Tashima concluded that the elimination of the program in 2012, on the premise that it violated a state statute enacted two years earlier, infringed on students’ First and 14th Amendment rights. The court has not yet scheduled a hearing on what to do next.
“The court is convinced that decisions regarding the MAS program were motivated by a desire to advance a political agenda by capitalizing on race-based fears,” wrote Judge Tashima, of the United States District Court for the District of Arizona.
Judge A. Wallace Tashima of the United States District Court for the District of Arizona concluded that state officials had acted out of racial animus in shutting down a Mexican-American studies program in Tucson's public schools.
In a document dated on his last workday as superintendent, Mr. Horne wrote that the Tucson program violated that statute — which did not take effect until two days later. Once it took effect, his successor, Mr. Huppenthal, hired an independent auditor to investigate the program.
In May 2011, the auditor reported that the program did not, in fact, violate A.R.S. 15-112 — at which point Mr. Huppenthal and other officials at the Arizona Department of Education opened their own investigation. Judge Tashima wrote that when the investigation began, the officials had already come to the conclusion that the program was illegal. Then, he found, the department conducted its inquiry solely on the basis of course materials, without attending any classes or speaking to any teachers.
Ultimately, Mr. Huppenthal directed the department to withhold 10 percent of the Tucson Unified School District’s state funding because of the violation of the statute, and the district decided to end the Mexican-American studies program as a result.
In an interview on Wednesday, Mr. Huppenthal called the idea that he bore animus toward Mexican-Americans “ridiculous,” noting that he grew up in a predominantly Mexican-American area of Tucson.
The case, González v. Douglas, names the current superintendent, Diane Douglas, as the primary defendant. But Stefan Swiat, a spokesman for the Arizona Department of Education, emphasized that the case began before Ms. Douglas took office.
The superintendent of the Tucson Unified School District did not respond to an email inquiry on Wednesday about the district’s next steps.