The ensemble has just learned the number from the choreographer Jared Grimes, and is getting ready for a break before Kenny Leon arrives. He is directing them in the musical “Holler if Ya Hear Me,” which uses Shakur’s music and poetry to tell a story about love, community and second chances.
True Colors Theater Company, which Mr. Leon co-founded in 2002, opens the show on Sept. 12 in a 375-seat theater nestled in the affluent, predominantly African-American Cascade Heights neighborhood.
With a 19-person cast, it’s one of the company’s most ambitious undertakings. It’s also a second chance for the musical, which Mr. Leon first directed in a short-lived Broadway run that raised questions about whether hip-hop could find an audience there.
”Holler” opened on Broadway in June 2014. Starring the spoken word artist Saul Williams, Tonya Pinkins (“Caroline, or Change”) and Christopher Jackson (“Hamilton”), it closed after 17 previews and 38 performances.
At that point, “In the Heights” was the only Broadway musical that had successfully incorporated hip-hop. A year after “Holler” closed, a show called “Hamilton” arrived, its hip-hop score helping to make it the rare once-in-a-generation blockbuster.
Mr. Leon said he hoped the True Colors rendition would lead to more life for the show. “A lot of eyes are on the production to see how it works in Atlanta, so that maybe we could have a national tour,” he said.
The story line will remain largely the same, though recent events may give it a new impact.
“People are going to see the story through a different lens because of Ferguson and Black Lives Matter,” Todd Kreidler, the librettist, predicted.
In “Holler,” John has just returned home after serving six years in prison to find that his best friend, Vertus, and ex-girlfriend Corinne are in a relationship. To make matters worse, when Vertus’s brother Benny is killed in a gang war, revenge is in the air, which sends their mother into a tailspin.
Determined to keep his new job at the salvage yard and leave his criminal past behind, John must learn who to hold onto and what to let go of in order to survive.
For the True Colors production, Mr. Kreidler said he reordered and reorganized some material. The opening number, “My Block,” now focuses on John’s being released from prison, and we meet the other characters later. The second number is now “I Ain’t Mad at Cha,” which helps to sketch in the story of John and Vertus’s friendship.
“Artistically, I look at Broadway as the tryout, and I am excited to get back into this story again,” Mr. Kreidler explained.
Among other changes, the creators have added spoken-word sections into the number “Ghetto Gospel,” written by students in the ensemble who attend Spelman College and Clark Atlanta University. This allows the cast to reflect on incidents that happened long after Shakur’s death.
In other ways, too, the show is drawing on this city’s substantial talent pool.
The musical director, Matthew Head, has been the music producer on the television show “Greenleaf,” which is filmed in Atlanta. Rob Demery, who portrayed Muhammad Ali in the True Colors production of “Fetch Clay, Make Man,” will play John. D. Woods, a former member of the platinum-selling group Danity Kane and another True Colors veteran, is Corinne.
Mr. Demery said he found an affinity with John through his own experience seeing relatives come home from prison and attempt to reintegrate into society.
Theresa Hightower plays Vertus and Benny’s mother. A single mother herself, she has not lost a son, but says she knows many mothers who have. She recognizes that many people will come to the show because they love Tupac, but she wants them to leave with a deeper message.
If Mr. Leon gets his wish, the show will be not just entertaining, but inspiring.
