Chip Smith didn’t set out to get into the golf course business. He ran an advertising company in South Carolina in the 1990s, then got into the more lucrative business of running an institutional pharmacy in 2000, selling medications to nursing homes.
He built a home on a golf course, the Tournament Players Club in Myrtle Beach, S.C. It was only after he sold the pharmacy business that he decided he liked the view from his windows and bought the course.
“The PGA Tour was attempting to sell a number of properties,” he said. “I thought, what a perfect opportunity. So I took some of the proceeds from the pharmacy and purchased the TPC Myrtle Beach,” paying $7.5 million in 2006.
Owning a golf course is a luxury akin, for some people, to owning a vineyard or sports team. It may also come with a warning from friends and relatives.
The statistics on golf courses seem to support this pessimism. In 2016, the number of closings outpaced openings, with the total number of operating courses in the United States falling by 171 to 14,117, according to the National Golf Foundation.
This was down 5.9 percent from a peak of nearly 16,000 courses in 2006, the culmination of a 20-year construction boom.
But wealthy individuals still are attracted to course ownership — and some have great success with it. President Trump is one. He owns or manages 18 golf clubs in the United States and abroad, several of which have been host to major tournaments.
It’s probably not surprising that clubs, which require millions of dollars a year in upkeep, are not the highest-returning investment. But like vineyards to wine lovers, they are the fulfillment of a dream.
Warren Stephens, chairman, chief executive and president of Stephens Inc., a privately held investment bank in Arkansas, came to course ownership with financial capital and knowledge of the country’s best courses. His father, Jackson, was the fourth chairman of Augusta National Golf Club, home of the Masters tournament.
But he needed time to do it. He bought 1,300 acres of wooded, rolling land in Roland, Ark., outside of Little Rock, in 2001. He began clearing land the next year and hired Tom Fazio, a well-known course architect, to design the club. In 2004, the Alotian Club opened, and the clubhouse opened the next year.
Today, the Alotian is ranked the 27th best course in the United States by Golf Digest. It has only 200 members and remains dedicated to golf alone. It has attracted professional golfers like Phil Mickelson, Tiger Woods, Jack Nicklaus and Arnold Palmer.
“It’s turned out to be a great experience for members and guests,” Mr. Stephens said. The website Top 100 Golf Courses estimated that the cost of developing the course was $18 million.
In Mr. Stephens’s case, he was building a course where he could buy all the land he needed. Eric Bergstol had a different challenge in his quest to put a high-caliber golf course close to Manhattan.
Mr. Bergstol, who started as a residential developer, had already built several clubs in the New Jersey and New York suburbs and had learned from his mistakes. The biggest lesson, he said, was to make sure he had financing before he started construction.
With Bayonne Golf Club, four miles by boat from Manhattan, Mr. Bergstol struck a deal to take and clean the fill being dredged from New York Harbor. That took some bite out of what he said was $130 million to build a golf club on top of a former waste dump — albeit one with views of the New York skyline and strong winds to challenge golfers.
The club opened in 2006, and he said he was fortunate to have a number of members committed before the financial crash. Initiation fees then, he said, were $100,000.
Buying an existing course can be a better deal. Mr. Smith said he made improvements to the TPC Myrtle Beach when he bought it, even though the club was only seven years old. He wanted it to stand out in the crowded Myrtle Beach golf market, which has over 100 courses. When he sold the course to a group of Chinese investors in 2014, he said, he made a good profit, which he wouldn’t disclose.
But last year, when he and a partner, Doug Marty, bought a course in Florida, Wellington National, he said he realized just how much money it could cost to turn around a course and make it profitable.
They shut the club for a year of renovations. It has now reopened and started to attract members. The two partners are betting that it can attract members from the surrounding equestrian community and nearby Palm Beach.
But recouping their investment will take time. The initiation fee is $7,500 and annual dues are $6,750, comparatively modest in an area where $50,000 and $100,000 initiation fees are common.
Pure resort courses are a different challenge. They need to rely on a steady stream of people visiting them.
Jay Cashman, who runs a marine construction and dredging business in Boston, bought Kilkea Castle outside of Dublin in 2013. He said he had spent about 20 million euros (about $23.7 million) renovating the 12th-century castle and reviving the golf course that surrounds it. The annual payroll is €4 million ($4.7 million).
Paul Schock, a top amateur golfer and successful private equity investor, doesn’t have that luxury.
In 2004, after one of the companies he had invested in went public and “gave me a big pile of money,” Mr. Schock went to Nebraska to play Sand Hills Golf Club, a well-known destination for serious golfers. Through that trip, he discovered land 70 miles away on the Snake River in Valentine, Neb., population 2,803.
He bought 1,700 acres at first and another 800 acres over time with the idea of creating a golf destination. With an initial investment of $25 million from himself, friends and investors in his private equity ventures, he built two 18-hole courses and a quirky short course.
In 2010, with the effects of the recession lingering, the Prairie Club opened to widespread acclaim from golf writers, but in the first two and a half years, Mr. Schock said, the club lost $5 million.
Now, he has a thriving golf destination, with members and guests from across the country, and it has helped the local economy.
