ERBIL, Iraq — Defense Secretary Jim Mattis asked the president of Iraq’s Kurdish autonomous region on Tuesday to postpone a referendum next month on Kurdish independence.
Mr. Mattis’s meeting with President Massoud Barzani was part of a broader push by American officials to head off what they fear may be a new period of political instability as Iraq continues its battle against the Islamic State.
“Our point right now is to stay focused like a laser beam on the defeat of ISIS and to let nothing distract us,” Mr. Mattis told reporters, using an acronym for the Islamic State, shortly before flying to Erbil, the capital of the autonomous region.
Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson made a similar appeal for the Kurds to postpone the referendum, which is scheduled for Sept. 25, in a telephone call earlier this month with Mr. Barzani. So did Gen. Joseph L. Votel, the head of the United States Central Command, who visited Iraq last week.
But Kurdish officials said that Mr. Barzani did not pull back from the referendum in his meeting with Mr. Mattis even as he has kept the door open for further talks with Iraqi officials in Baghdad and with the United States.
Many Kurds have long dreamed of independence, though their region is burdened by serious economic problems, and the Kurdish dream of having their own state is opposed by neighbors like Turkey and Iran, which also have large Kurdish populations. The vote, Kurdish officials also emphasize, would not lead to an immediate break with Baghdad but rather a long process of negotiating an amicable divorce.
Halgurd Hikmat, the top spokesman for the Kurds’ Ministry of Pesh Merga, as the Kurdish fighters are known, dismissed concerns that the referendum would hamper the campaign against the Islamic State, arguing that it might even give Kurds more of a reason to fight.
Critics, however, say the referendum is ill advised for a region that has economic troubles. They also say it could lead to conflicts over territory, distract attention from the battle against the Islamic State and pose a new political problem for Iraq’s prime minister, Haider al-Abadi. American officials have forged a good working relationship with Mr. Abadi, who is trying to secure another term as prime minister in parliamentary elections expected next year.
Mr. Mattis arrived in Erbil after talks with Mr. Abadi in Baghdad during which he expressed support for Iraq’s territorial integrity, according to a statement issued by the prime minister’s office.
He was joined in his meetings in Erbil by Mr. McGurk; Douglas A. Silliman, the American ambassador to Iraq; and Lt. Gen. Stephen J. Townsend, commander of the American-led campaign against the Islamic State. After the meeting, Mr. Mattis flew to Amman, Jordan, while Mr. McGurk and Mr. Silliman stayed behind to continue late-night talks with Kurdish officials.
In recent comments, Mr. Barzani said his government was open to an “alternative” to a referendum. Some Western officials believe that signals the Kurds are looking for some sort of face-saving way to avoid the vote, which Western analysts assert is not supported by all Kurdish factions.
But some Kurdish officials say the only alternative that might be acceptable is a formal guarantee that the international community will respect the results of a future referendum or an assurance that Kurdish aspirations will eventually be recognized.
But Masrour Barzani said the purpose of talks with officials in Baghdad would be to work out terms of the Kurds’ separation.
