In one in six of these killings, there is no criminal sanction, according to a new Marshall Project examination of 400,000 homicides committed by civilians between 1980 and 2014. That rate is far higher than ones for homicides involving other combinations of races.
In almost 17 percent of cases when a black man was killed by a non-Hispanic white civilian over the last three decades, the killing was categorized as justifiable, which is the term used when a police officer or a civilian kills someone committing a crime or in self-defense. Over all, the police classify fewer than 2 percent of homicides committed by civilians as justifiable.
The disparity persists across different cities, ages, weapons and relationships between killer and victim.
The data were processed to standardize key variables and exclude more than 200,000 cases that lacked essential information or were homicides by the police. The resulting data detail the circumstances of each death: any weapons used; information on the killer’s and victim’s race, age, ethnicity and sex; and how police investigators classify each type of killing (“brawl due to the influence of alcohol,” “sniper attack” or “lover’s triangle,” for example).
Little large-scale research has examined the role of race in “justifiable” homicides that do not involve the police. The data examined by The Marshall Project are more comprehensive and cover a longer time period than other research into the question, much of which has focused on controversial Stand Your Ground laws.
“Tell me that it doesn’t factor in if the person is black when they’re approaching the suspect,” Mr. Vilos said. “It contributes to the decision to pull the trigger because of the fear associated with the stereotype.
But killings of black males by whites are more than eight times as likely as all others combined to be labeled justifiable, a racial disparity that is hard to explain based solely on the circumstances reported in the police data and one that has persisted for decades.
In comparison, when Hispanics killed black men, about 5.5 percent of cases were called justifiable. When non-Hispanic whites killed Hispanics, it was 3.1 percent. When blacks killed whites, the figure was just 0.8 percent. When black males were killed by other blacks, and when whites killed other whites, the figure was about 2 percent, the same as the overall rate.
Although the data examined ends shortly after the fatal police shooting of Michael Brown in Ferguson, Mo., in 2014, reform efforts since then have primarily focused on police shootings. That leaves these civilian cases largely forgotten.
It is impossible to say to what extent the disparities — no matter how great — are due to racial prejudice by the police, prosecutors or juries. One possible explanation for the differing rates could lie in the different circumstances of the killings, including where they happened.
Although the F.B.I.’s Supplementary Homicide Report tracks more than 100 details about each killing, the location of the death is not recorded. In addition, some police agencies, indeed some states, choose not to share some or all information on killings.
Still, the disparities in how the police classify these cases remain across widely different circumstances and causes of death. Whether the killer and victim were married, lovers, neighbors or complete strangers, whether they were shot, stabbed or beaten, the trend holds. The killings of black men by whites were two to 10 times as likely to be called justifiable.
Beyond the police consideration of each case, there are three additional stages at which a killer can establish self-defense: A prosecutor can decide not to pursue charges, a grand jury can decline to indict, and a jury can find a killer not guilty.
There is no national standard for how a prosecutor’s office decides whether to prosecute a case.
The F.B.I. data may not reflect those determinations: Prosecutors are not generally required to collect and report their data. Despite these flaws, the data are the closest thing available to a comprehensive, nationwide accounting of homicides.
Despite local customs and policies for how prosecutors approach self-defense cases, in the F.B.I.’s data almost every law enforcement agency, from Oakland, Calif., to Philadelphia, showed racial disparities in how they categorized killings as justified. The phenomenon is not peculiar to any state or region.
Personal experiences and cultural background mean even well-meaning prosecutors can succumb to stereotypes, said Ms. Pearson, who spent 14 years as a prosecutor in Miami and now works for the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida.
Without looking at prosecutors’ and the police’s unconscious prejudices, Ms. Pearson said, racially biased outcomes are inevitable.
