The private detective at the center of a Fox News article about the death of a young Democratic aide claims that the White House and a wealthy Trump supporter urged the network to publish the article as part of a scheme to blunt speculation about the president’s ties to Russia, according to a lawsuit filed Tuesday.
The network later retracted the article, saying it did not meet its standards.
The lawsuit, alleging defamation and racial discrimination, was filed Tuesday morning in the United States District Court in the Southern District of New York. It named Fox News, 21st Century Fox, Mr. Butowsky and the author of the article, Malia Zimmerman, as defendants.
Mr. Rich, who worked for the Democratic National Committee, was fatally shot in Washington, D.C., in July 2016. The case is unsolved. The retracted article, citing law enforcement sources, said Mr. Rich had shared thousands of D.N.C. emails with WikiLeaks — a theory that would undercut the assertions that Russia had interfered in the election on behalf of Mr. Trump.
Mr. Wheeler, who is black, states in the suit that he has faced discrimination at Fox News because of his race. Mr. Wheeler, who is paid a set amount for each appearance he makes on the network, says that he has received less airtime, money and fame than his white colleagues.
Fox News also denied the racial discrimination claims in the suit.
Sarah Huckabee Sanders, the White House press secretary, said during a press briefing Tuesday that, “The president had no knowledge of the story and it’s completely untrue that he or the White House” had involvement.
The lawsuit comes as Fox News and 21st Century Fox have attempted to move past a sexual harassment scandal that burst into public view last year and led to the ouster of Roger Ailes, the network’s founding chairman; Bill O’Reilly, the prominent anchor; and several other employees. Yet the issue has emerged in other divisions at the company and has cast a shadow over its $15 billion bid for Sky, the European satellite giant.
In the complaint, Mr. Wheeler states that Ms. Zimmerman worked closely with Mr. Butowsky, a Trump supporter and occasional Fox News commentator, to push a fake article to advance the president’s agenda. The suit states that in April, Mr. Butowsky met with Sean Spicer, the president’s former press secretary, about the investigation into the death of Mr. Rich.
Ms. Zimmerman and Mr. Butowsky could not immediately be reached for comment.
