U.S.|In Baltimore, Gunfire and Scandals Aplenty. So Where Are Police?
In Baltimore, Gunfire and Scandals Aplenty. So Where Are Police?
BALTIMORE — The pop-pop of gunfire echoed through the Druid Heights neighborhood several times on Saturday, but a volunteer cleanup crew barely reacted to the familiar sound. Instead, the volunteers noted what was missing: In the hours they spent clearing waist-high weeds and broken glass from a vacant lot, they saw no sign of the police.
They would have liked to have seen a patrol car roll by, but they were also well aware of recent reminders of the mistrust many Baltimore residents have of the police. In the last three weeks, videos became public that appeared to show officers planting drugs in two separate incidents, prosecutors were forced to drop dozens of cases that relied on the testimony of officers in those videos, and two detectives pleaded guilty to federal racketeering charges.
“People want the police to do their job and make the community safe, but then when the police show up, people are afraid of what they’re going to do,” said Darlene Cain, one of the volunteers and the president of a local advocacy group, Mothers on the Move. She knows those conflicted feelings better than most people; nine years ago, her son was killed in a confrontation with Baltimore officers.
Since Freddie Gray died in April 2015 from injuries sustained in police custody, this city has endured rioting, the failed prosecution of six officers charged in Mr. Gray’s death, a surge in violent crime and a jump in drug overdose deaths. A lacerating Justice Department report documented systematic racial bias and abuse by the Baltimore Police Department, drawing we-told-you-so’s from the city’s black majority.
City officials have made vow after vow to change, including agreeing to a consent decree with the Justice Department to overhaul the way the police operate. The former mayor fired the police commissioner and appointed a new one, Kevin Davis, who has made changes like equipping officers with body cameras, imposing mandatory 12-hour shifts to increase staffing, and eliminating plainclothes units in hopes that uniforms would promote better behavior.
“We know that we’ve got to drive these numbers down, but we also recognize that we can’t do this work by ourselves,” said Ms. Pugh, who took office in December.
So far, residents like Yolanda Savoy, who lives in the rowhouse next to the lot cleared by Ms. Cain and the volunteers, see no sign of improvement — either in police conduct or in crime-fighting. “I don’t expect too much, honestly,” she said.
Ms. Savoy, 37, does not let her children play outside — not since her daughter Jezell, then 8, was shot in the foot last year by a stray bullet. The man suspected of shooting her was fatally shot two months later.
Even activists who are sharply critical of the police say to give it time. The department is still adjusting to the body cameras first issued last year; the consent decree was not finalized by a federal judge until April; and a court-appointed independent monitor for the Police Department has not been named yet.
Baltimore is on pace for a record-high homicide rate this year — roughly double the rate per 100,000 people in Chicago, a city often described as plagued by violence. A three-day Baltimore Ceasefire organized by community groups ended on Sunday with two homicides — an improvement on the city’s recent average of almost one per day.
Sgt. Bob Cherry, former president of Fraternal Order of Police Lodge 3, which represents Baltimore officers, said body cameras were “something that our guys are buying into, more than they thought they would.” He cautioned against making too much of the videos, arguing that the officers had forgotten to turn their cameras on before finding the drugs, and then turned the cameras on and re-enacted the drug discoveries.
There is widespread agreement that the Baltimore police have become less aggressive since Mr. Gray’s death. That has put the city at the heart of a national debate about the Ferguson effect, the theory that more intense scrutiny and criticism — like the upheaval in Ferguson, Mo. after the police shooting of Michael Brown in 2014 — has made officers more cautious.
The idea that the police have retreated under siege will not go away. But even if it's true, is it necessarily bad?
Arrests here dropped sharply even as violence rose; this year, arrests are running more than 40 percent below the rate three years ago. But there is disagreement about what lies behind the numbers, and whether it is good or bad — or both.
The police make far fewer of the low-level stops, searches and arrests that black residents, in particular, described as a kind of organized abuse, and the consent decree formalizes limits on those stops. “That’s most of the decline — the nuisance arrests,” said William H. Murphy, Jr., a prominent lawyer who represented Mr. Gray’s family.
But some critics suspect that officers have intentionally shirked crime-fighting in order to undermine changes. “It’s almost like they’re allowing anarchy to happen,” Mr. Kelly said.
Several officers, who refused to speak on the record, denied that, but said they feared that the police being less aggressive on more minor offenses would lead to higher crime. Several studies on that question from around the country have been inconclusive, and in Baltimore, “no one can say with any confidence” why violence has worsened, or how it is linked to the drop in arrests, said Stephen L. Morgan, a professor of sociology at Johns Hopkins University who studies the issue.
The activists who have spent years demanding that the police here change say they understand the pessimism, but refuse to give in to it.
