LONDON — Prime Minister Theresa May of Britain on Wednesday criticized the reaction of President Trump to the violence in Charlottesville, Va., after initially declining to condemn the American leader’s stance.
“It is important for all those in positions of responsibility to condemn far-right views wherever we hear them,” she added.
In a statement on Wednesday, the justice minister in Germany, Heiko Maas, condemned Mr. Trump’s reaction to the events in Virginia.
“It is unbearable how Trump is now glossing over the violence of the right-wing hordes from Charlottesville,” said Mr. Maas, whose Social Democratic Party is in a governing coalition with Chancellor Angela Merkel’s Christian Democrats.
“No one should trivialize anti-Semitism and racism by neo-Nazis,” Mr. Maas added.
In Britain, Mrs. May’s muted response was seen as the latest attempt to avoid angering Mr. Trump. As the country negotiates its exit from the European Union, London has said it wants to secure a favorable trade agreement with Washington, and Mrs. May’s government seems to be trying to keep on Mr. Trump’s good side.
Steven Fielding, a professor of political history at the University of Nottingham, England, said Britain’s current vulnerability made it even more difficult for Mrs. May to speak out.
Past British prime ministers have been reluctant to criticize the White House, and the countries’ close ties have normally meant that the United States “has held the whip hand,” he said.
After Mr. Trump’s attempts this year to bar immigrants from several Muslim-majority countries, Mrs. May said that American policy was not a topic of discussion for her government.
A few days later, Mrs. May again attracted reproof for what many saw as a failure to defend the mayor of London, Sadiq Khan, who had been attacked by Mr. Trump in Twitter posts after a terrorist attack in the British capital.
This week, Mrs. May has come under fire for refusing to rescind an invitation to Mr. Trump to travel to Britain for a state visit.
While Mrs. May has been guarded in her response, some of her Conservative Party colleagues have been more pointed.
Sajid Javid, the minister for communities and local government, posted a condemnation on Twitter.
