WASHINGTON — President Trump’s warning on Tuesday that North Korea would experience “fire and fury like the world has never seen” if it continued threatening the United States was a remarkable escalation of military rhetoric with little precedent in the modern era, historians and analysts said.
It is not clear whether Mr. Trump intended the historical parallel — White House officials did not respond to questions about how much planning went into his brief statement, or what was intended by the alliterative language — but it was a stark break with decades of more measured presidential responses to brewing foreign conflicts.
Mr. Truman delivered his muscular message at a time when the United States had an overwhelming military advantage over Japan, which did not have a nuclear weapon; Mr. Trump’s threat was aimed instead at a government that has developed nuclear weapons and has been testing intercontinental ballistic missiles.
President Dwight D. Eisenhower used to say that the more shrill the Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev was in the language he used against the United States — promising “we will bury you” and “we’re turning out missiles like sausages” — the more tempered he would be, Mr. Beschloss said.
Mr. Trump’s statement, delivered from his Bedminster, N.J., golf resort, went far beyond the usual tough-but-vague language that past presidents have used to confront North Korea’s frequent provocations.
Their responses — full of strong condemnations and recognition of grave threats — have mostly left out the fiery, nationalistic language favored by the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, and his father, Kim Jong-il, before him. Mr. Trump’s, by contrast, seemed to have adopted it.
“This is a little bit more jingoistic, and it borrows a little bit from the tone of the North Koreans,” said Peter Feaver, who helped shape President George W. Bush’s message as an adviser on his National Security Council staff.
Mr. Feaver, now a political science professor at Duke, compared Mr. Trump’s choice of words to comments that Mr. Bush made in 2003 about Iraqi militants targeting American troops in Iraq.
The similarities to Pyongyang’s over-the-top rhetoric prompted rebukes from senior Democratic lawmakers who said they feared Mr. Trump was blithely marching the United States closer to a costly war.
“We should not be engaging in the same kind of blustery and provocative statements as North Korea about nuclear war,” Mr. Cardin added.
Mr. Feaver said the explosive statement put Mr. Trump on a “risky path” because of its potential to inflame Mr. Kim, but was in keeping with his penchant for upending the established protocols of diplomacy in efforts to bring about a better outcome.
“They may be saying, ‘Look, we have a 30-year record of bipartisan failure on this issue, so let’s flip the script and give North Korea a bit of its own medicine and see if we can get a different result,’” Mr. Feaver said.
But breaking with tradition can have perilous consequences when bombs and missiles are involved.
