Movies|Steven Soderbergh Quit Movies. Now He’s Back. What Gives?
Steven Soderbergh Quit Movies. Now He’s Back. What Gives?
Where would heist movies be without the Big Score — that payoff so irresistible it can lure the most jaded desperado out of hiding?
It’s the kind of temptation that propels many of Steven Soderbergh’s movies, and motivates him as a filmmaker, too. His latest feature, “Logan Lucky,” is once again about a group of larcenous but lovable characters: this time, a laid-off construction worker (Channing Tatum) who recruits his brother (Adam Driver) and sister (Riley Keough) as well as a volatile prison convict (Daniel Craig) to pull off the Nascar racetrack robbery of a lifetime.
“Logan Lucky,” which opens Aug. 18, puts a down-home spin on the elaborate capers in Mr. Soderbergh’s glitzier “Ocean’s Eleven” series. It is also the first theatrical release he has directed in four years, following what appeared to be several very unambiguous pronouncements that he was giving up filmmaking altogether.
Now that he seems to be going back on his word, Mr. Soderbergh is as gleeful as he is humbled. At various times in his career, he’s been an art house auteur, a must-have director of the moment, a renegade and a recluse. But he’s found what he wants to do is make movies that, whatever genre they fall into, can be seen by as many people as possible.
It’s not that Mr. Soderbergh went into creative exile; he has continued to work on projects like “The Knick,” the ambitious Cinemax period drama that has now been canceled.
“Logan Lucky” is not his splashy re-emergence from any retirement, nor any statement on present-day America. It’s just the kind of story he likes to tell, perhaps because he sees the moviemaking process — when it’s executed correctly — as its own perfect crime.
Sitting in his TriBeCa office one late July morning, the wiry Mr. Soderbergh, 54, was an inconspicuous man in an inconspicuous room. He wore horn-rimmed glasses and a T-shirt that read “A Mike Nichols Film,” and the small work space was decorated with knickknacks like a Peabody Award for “The Knick” and a sagging cat balloon (“Wishing You a Purr-fect Birthday”).
When he talks about his movies, in his enthusiastic, quietly intense way, it is a therapy where he makes on-the-fly realizations he missed during the filmmaking process.
And though he can be self-deprecating, Mr. Soderbergh, an Academy Award winner for his crisscrossing drug-trade narrative “Traffic,” is deadly serious when he says he is never going back to making the films he used to.
After a career of independent breakthroughs (“sex, lies and videotape”), mainstream hits (“Erin Brockovich”) and occasional oddities (“Full Frontal”), Mr. Soderbergh said he was changed for the worse by “Che,” his biographical film about Che Guevara, which was released in two parts in 2008.
That film was a scramble to finance — European investors ended up footing its estimated $58 million budget — and a slog to shoot; Mr. Soderbergh spent about two and a half months on it and still found himself wishing he’d had more time. “Che” ended up a critical success but a commercial dud, and it soured Mr. Soderbergh on so-called prestige films. “‘Che’ beat that out of me,” he said.
Mr. Soderbergh said he was lured back to theatrical features in fall 2014, when he received the screenplay for “Logan Lucky,” credited to Rebecca Blunt. Though Mr. Soderbergh intended only to produce the film and find another director for it, he was drawn to what he felt was the script’s empathy for working-class characters who get to be more than caricatures.
George Clooney, left, and Brad Pitt in Mr. Soderbergh’s '‘Ocean’s Eleven.”Credit...Bob Marshak/Warner Bros.
“Logan Lucky” allowed Mr. Soderbergh to retain complete creative control and sidestep the Hollywood studios: in a plan devised by Fingerprint Releasing (Mr. Soderbergh’s company) and Bleecker Street (an independent distributor), the movie will open in at least 2,500 theaters, Mr. Soderbergh said.
Mr. Soderbergh, who sometimes works pseudonymously as his own editor and director of photography, is a one-man band and also a trickster. The Hollywood Reporter has questioned whether Ms. Blunt, the “Logan Lucky” screenwriter, exists, and suggested that the film was in fact written by Mr. Soderbergh himself; or by the TV host Jules Asner, his wife; or by the comedian John Henson.
On Twitter, Mr. Soderbergh posted, “Rebecca Blunt is not a pseudonym for a male writer. She is a woman, and she wrote LOGAN LUCKY entirely by herself.” He told me simply that she was “highly amused” by this speculation and found it “very entertaining,” adding that Ms. Blunt — who has no other credits on her IMDb page — was busy with another writing assignment and unavailable for comment.
Asked about trade publication reports that said he was directing a new movie with Claire Foy and Juno Temple that he shot on an iPhone, Mr. Soderbergh offered a vehement if careful rebuttal.
“You could argue that it’s the perfect fake story, right?” he said. “It sounds plausible.” He acknowledged he had met with Ms. Foy and knows Ms. Temple through friends.
He does not spend much time mourning projects that he feels lost their momentum, like “The Knick,” the critically acclaimed series that starred Clive Owen as a surgeon in early 20th-century New York. Mr. Soderbergh had directed 20 episodes over two previous seasons, and there were scripts prepared for a potential third season, written by its creators, Jack Amiel and Michael Begler. Even so, Cinemax canceled “The Knick” in March.
Many factors played into this decision, Mr. Soderbergh said, including the overall cost of the show — “when you get up into the $6 million an hour range, that’s not cheap,” he said — and Cinemax’s decision to focus on action-oriented programming.
Ultimately, he did not lay the blame for the show’s cancellation at anyone’s feet. “External forces were at play that had nothing to do with the show itself,” he said.
Nearly every other director she has worked with, she said, has asked her what it is like to work with Mr. Soderbergh. “I get asked about Steven Soderbergh more than I get asked about my grandfather, honestly,” said Ms. Keough, who is a granddaughter of Elvis Presley.
Mr. Soderbergh does not see himself this way, and hardly expects that promoting “Logan Lucky” as his return to movie theaters will compel anyone to see it.
In the films and TV shows he collaborates on now — whether “Mosaic,” an interactive movie he has directed for HBO, or “Ocean’s Eight,” an all-star female-led heist movie starring Sandra Bullock and Rihanna that he is producing for the director Gary Ross — Mr. Soderbergh said his only goal was to tell stories that are accessible, not esoteric.
Given the choice, Mr. Soderbergh has no interest in being a personality and would much rather let his work speak for himself. Anonymity, he said, suits him just fine.
