WASHINGTON — The Department of Homeland Security said on Tuesday that it would use its authority to exempt the agency from having to comply with environmental and other laws in its efforts to build border walls and access roads in the San Diego area.
The waiver would apply to the construction of several wall prototypes the agency plans to build in the region in response to an executive order signed by President Trump in January.
Congress has passed several laws that give Homeland Security the authority to exempt its construction of physical barriers like border walls from a variety of environmental and land management laws. The department invoked that authority five times from 2005 to 2008, the agency said. Most of the construction of the border walls currently in use was done during that period.
David Lapan, a spokesman for the department, said the waiver would also apply to replacement fencing and roads the agency plans to build in the San Diego area. The waiver will be published in the Federal Register in the coming days, the agency said.
On Tuesday, Brian Segee, a lawyer with the Center for Biological Diversity, which sued the Trump administration in April for failing to study the environmental impact of the proposed border wall, said Homeland Security’s decision to use its waiver authority was unconstitutional.
Mr. Trump’s plan to build a border wall has been part of a contentious budget fight in Congress. Lawmakers balked at providing the administration the $3.6 billion it was seeking in the 2017 and 2018 budgets for just over 100 miles of wall. Instead, members voted to expand funding to increase the use of technology such as sensors at the border.
A recent spending bill passed by the House of Representatives included $1.6 billion for a border wall. That would pay for 74 miles of physical barriers along the southwest border. Senate Democrats have signaled that they would try to block funding for a border wall.
In the absence of congressional funding, Homeland Security has moved $20 million from other programs to pay for the construction of several border wall prototypes like the ones planned for this summer in the San Diego area.
The Army Corps of Engineers has begun drilling and taking soil samples in some areas along the border to determine what type of barriers would be most effective, and is expected to start similar work in the San Diego area this month.
Homeland Security officials said the prototypes would be added to the existing border walls in San Diego and would allow the agency to evaluate which barriers were most effective in giving Border Patrol agents time to respond to illegal drug-smuggling and human smuggling.
Officials had planned to build four to eight prototypes this summer. But on Friday, Customs and Border Protection, the parent agency of the Border Patrol, said the construction timetable could be pushed back as late as November.
A vendor who was not selected as a finalist in the bidding for contracts to build the border wall has filed a protest with the Government Accountability Office. The office has 100 days to review the protest before it issues a decision.
Carlos Diaz, a spokesman for Customs and Border Protection, said the contract process is delayed, but “could resume” sooner if the protest is resolved before the 100 days are up.
