PORTLAND, Ore. — Before the first batch of Nutella and sea salt doughnuts was sold on Fremont Street on Wednesday morning, Brianna Gneckow posed a question to her co-workers at Pip’s Original Doughnuts: “Does everybody have water?” But by lunch, hours before Portland endured a daily record high of 103 degrees, the staff had switched off the fryer and locked the doors.
Portland, of all places, was just too hot. As the Pacific Northwest sweated and wilted this week in the grip of one of the fiercest heat waves ever recorded in this region, Portland reached 105 degrees on Thursday but again fell short of the all-time mark of 107. A 78-year-old record in Salem, the Oregon capital, fell on Wednesday, when the city hit 106 degrees. Thermometers in Seattle, a three-hour drive from Portland, showed temperatures in the 90s on Wednesday and Thursday, setting daily records.
Here in Oregon’s largest city, it was sometimes hard to tell what was more startling: the record-setting heat or the fact that, on a planet getting used to higher temperatures, Portland was not entirely unprepared for it. In a region known for its enviously mild, low-humidity summers, people have increasingly and quietly embraced air-conditioning. Federal data suggests that about 70 percent of the Portland area’s occupied homes and apartments have at least some air-conditioning, up from 44 percent in 2002.
“It would have exacerbated our situation tremendously if people had not been adding air-conditioning units to their homes,” Carmen Merlo, the director of the city’s emergency management bureau, said in an interview at Portland’s Emergency Coordination Center.
Of course, the mightiest air-conditioners could only do so much to overcome the effects of the high pressure ridge that settled over the Northwest.
Commuter rail service was suspended for part of the week, and transit officials ordered light rail trains slowed. The county government opened board-game-stocked, pet-friendly cooling centers on Tuesday and said they would operate until at least Monday. Downtown Portland’s street vendors urged customers waiting for fried rice to stand in the shade. 
“This is intense,” Kevin Nelson said as he stood alongside the Willamette River and bought a bottle of water for $1 from Emya Hall, 10, an aspiring singer who was raising money to travel to a talent showcase in California. On Wednesday, she sold three bottles in about three minutes.
The area has a sporadic history with sustained heat, including in 2009, when the airport weather station recorded temperatures of at least 90 degrees for 10 consecutive days. But scientists expect more heat waves like the one here this week as the planet grows hotter. They also say that climate change probably made this week’s weather more unpleasant.
Although Portland is still renowned for its temperate summers, researchers have measured clear shifts in the area’s climate. Before this week’s heat, Dr. Mote said, Portland posted eight days of daytime temperatures of 100 degrees or more since the beginning of 2010. For the whole of the 1950s and the ’60s, it recorded nine.
Overnight low temperatures have also risen sharply in recent decades.
So has interest in air-conditioning, an amenity that generations of people in the Pacific Northwest proudly shunned. The evolution in attitude extends north of Portland: In 2015, the most recent year for which statistics are available, the federal government found that the prevalence of residential air-conditioning in the Seattle area had more than doubled over about 11 years.
Developers and landlords often include air-conditioning in the projects that are transforming this region’s cityscapes, but Brent Jacobs, whose family has run a heating and air-conditioning business in Portland since the 1950s, said individual customers cited an array of reasons for their orders.
Some people, he said, moved to Oregon from warmer places where air-conditioning-controlling thermostats are just about as familiar as faucets, and demanded similar set comfort in the Pacific Northwest. Others complained that well-insulated houses trapped too much warm air. For some, there were persistent worries about how global temperatures — and those in Portland — were climbing.
Still, hundreds of thousands of people in the Northwest still do not have air-conditioning, and they often contend that the technology is unnecessary, too expensive or too harmful to the environment. Emergency officials were particularly worried this week about whether older residents and homeless people would be able to cope with the heat.
