Good morning on this shining Wednesday.
Apartment hunting in the city, especially during one of the busiest moving months, is no fun. And then there’s physically packing and hauling your stuff. Oh, and paying for movers, if you go that route.
We reached out to a few moving companies for some free advice on the best and worst times to relocate, and how to be smart about your move.
When’s the most expensive time to move?
“Moving in the summer season is more expensive than moving in the off-season by roughly 20 or 30 percent,” said Jon Katz, chief executive of Katz Moving in Long Island City, Queens. You can expect lower rates between October and January, he said.
Do prices surge on specific days or weeks of a month?
There is often more demand to move on Mondays and Fridays, he added, so you may also find lower quotes Tuesday through Thursday.
Jesse Gartman, chief executive of Veteran Movers NYC in West Farms in the Bronx, recommended 15 to 20 percent of the cost of the move, if you got good service.
Are there any hidden fees I should watch out for?
You should never be charged for a certificate of insurance or for parking tickets.
“The New York State Department of Transportation forbids licensed moving companies from charging clients for tickets,” Mr. Gartman said.
What else do customers frequently ask about?
Bed bugs. “Make sure your movers dry clean their blankets occasionally, or continuously replace their old blankets with new blankets,” Mr. Katz said.
Licenses. “Hire a licensed moving company; there are no guarantees with everything unless you see that regulation,” said Mr. Gartman, referring to the rights and protections in place for clients and movers.
Say hello to your midweek pick-me-up — a Wednesday with wonderful weather.
After some early patches of fog, we’ll have sunny, clear skies and a high near 89, followed by an evening perfect for staying out late and dancing in the dark.
And the best part? We’re expecting more of the same tomorrow.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until September 1.
Havana has arrived in Harlem.
The Harlem Havana Music & Cultural Festival, which continues for another week, brings Cuban artists, chefs, designers, dancers and others to the neighborhood to celebrate the longstanding cultural ties between Cuba’s capital and New York City.
The group Obini Bata performs with the Latin jazz saxophonist César López tonight at 7 (at Riverside Drive and West 122nd Street) and with the pianist Jorge Luis Pacheco on Thursday at 5 p.m. (at West 125th Street and Adam Clayton Powell Jr. Boulevard).
Mr. Pacheco will take the stage again on Friday evening at the National Jazz Museum in Harlem, on West 129th Street between Malcolm X Boulevard and Fifth Avenue, with the mandolin master Tim Porter and his blues and jazz trio.
And on Saturday, as part of “Summer in the City” along 135th Street, there will be dancing in the streets, a parade, a fashion show and an outdoor film.
