But it was Eichmann — and two years later, a team of Israeli agents swooped in on him at a bus stop, abducted him, and soon bundled the sedated Nazi onto a plane to Tel Aviv. The epochal trial that followed transformed the world’s understanding of the Holocaust, and not only that. It also played a crucial role in the development of international law, and it was a crucible for Israel, a young state still absorbing, with tensions, the arrival of European Jews.
Eichmann’s abduction in Argentina and prosecution in Israel are the subject of “Operation Finale: The Capture and Trial of Adolf Eichmann,” a new exhibition at the Museum of Jewish Heritage in Lower Manhattan. The show goes longer on spy thrills than on moral and legal perplexities, though that may have been inevitable given its co-organizer: none other than the Mossad, the intelligence service that is Israel’s equivalent of the C.I.A.
 In 1934 he joined the Sicherheitsdienst, the party’s intelligence agency, and later became chief of the Central Office for Jewish Emigration, based in Vienna. He mapped out the Nazis’ bizarre early plan to deport Jews to Madagascar, and then had even more sinister responsibilities. A table of figures here, drafted in 1942 at the Wannsee Conference outside Berlin, is as flat and bureaucratic as any other government document: Romania, 342,000; Slovakia, 88,000; the “Generalgouvernement,” referring to central Poland, 2.28 million. They are numbers of Jews, more than 11 million in total, whose extermination Eichmann and other Nazis planned there. In the last days of World War II, Eichmann would personally oversee the deportation of 400,000 Hungarian Jews to Auschwitz.
After the fall of the Third Reich, Eichmann was briefly in American custody. He escaped, lived on a chicken farm for two years, then fled again, eventually making his way to Argentina. In time he obtained a job with Mercedes-Benz — his employee ID card is here, with his assumed name, Ricardo Klement, beneath his chillingly recognizable photograph in thick spectacles. He might have lived out his days there, but in 1956 a German-Jewish émigré grew concerned about a boy his daughter was dating, and determined that the boy’s father was a wanted man. He alerted a German state prosecutor, who soon made contact with Israeli intelligence.
The bulk of “Operation Finale” is devoted to Eichmann’s abduction from Argentina, masterminded by the Mossad and encouraged by David Ben-Gurion, Israel’s founding prime minister. Investigators compared Nazi-era portraits to surveillance photographs and confirmed, by the shape of his ears, that Klement was indeed Eichmann. A team of more than two dozen Israeli agents was dispatched, and on May 11, 1960, the team snatched him off Garibaldi Street, bundling him into a car with bogus license plates. We see the keys and cigarette holder he had when he was kidnapped. Here is Eichmann’s false Israeli passport, used to board a delayed El Al flight, and the taped-over goggles he wore all the way to Tel Aviv. There is also newly filmed testimony from Rafi Eitan, an agent in the operation, though the overproduced videos in this show are bombastic and superficial, more appropriate to the History channel than to a rigorous exhibition.
Ben-Gurion’s announcement that Eichmann was in Israeli custody and would be prosecuted under Israeli law shocked the world. The trial was held nine months later, in a converted theater in Jerusalem, and is recreated in the final gallery here via three video projections arrayed around the unnerving, immediately recognizable defendant’s box. The image of Eichmann, impassive, untroubled, his lips pursed, is projected behind the glass booth, while to either side are the judges, the prosecutors, the spectators, and more than a dozen witnesses testifying, one by one, to what they had seen and suffered in the death camps.
Eichmann was convicted, sentenced to death and hanged in 1962: the only civil execution in Israel’s history. (That could change if Benjamin Netanyahu, the Israeli prime minister, has his way; last week he called for a reintroduction of the death penalty after the killings of several Israeli settlers in the West Bank.) A number of Israeli intellectuals, including the philosopher Martin Buber, pleaded for a commutation of the death sentence, on the grounds that “we are granting a victory for the enemy over us, and we do not want this victory.” But most Israelis were relieved, and the Eichmann trial began a new chapter for Holocaust survivors, who now spoke more openly of what they had endured after two decades of public silence.
And while Eichmann’s crimes predated the foundation of the State of Israel, the court set an important precedent by affirming that it had universal jurisdiction over crimes as grave as genocide. It also placed, in a way the Nuremberg trials did not, the voices of victims at the heart of the proceedings. Arendt considered those individual voices extraneous to the question of Eichmann’s guilt, but victims’ testimonies have since become a central plank in the practice of international justice.
These philosophical dilemmas and legal repercussions don’t much trouble “Operation Finale,” whose overly pat narrative may reflect its genesis within an Israeli government institution. Yet standing in front of the dock, that upright glass coffin familiar from a thousand newsreels, is a humbling experience. Not only does it contract the barbarism of the Holocaust into a single, indelible form; it also looks forward, and serves as a quiet commendation of the troubled institution built to prosecute the Eichmanns of our own age. That is the International Criminal Court in The Hague, which the United States — and Israel too — refuse to join.