This interview with Michel Feaster, the chief executive of Usermind, a customer-engagement software firm, was conducted and condensed by Adam Bryant.
A. I got a lot of my values from them. My mom was born in Wiesbaden, after World War II. She sued for independence from her family when she was 14. She worked her way through high school and college as a maid working for the Bismarck family.
Then one day she decided she wanted to come to America. She learned English by watching television. She had a construction company once but now works in nursing.
My father was an objector to the Vietnam War — he was deferred and was sent to Lebanon for 18 months to teach English. He’s very principled. He’s a professor now.
No. I was kind of a nerd. I didn’t fit in. My parents divorced when I was 8, and we relocated to Providence. We were poor. We lived in a bad section of the city, where we were renovating an old house.
I remember thinking that I was going to help support my mom and get her out of this situation. I decided when I was 11 that I would get straight A’s and go to Harvard. I ended up getting into Harvard, but I dropped out. I didn’t fit in.
I moved home and got a job at a convenience store working overnight. I worked my way up to running that store, and then I managed a number of them, with about 50 or 60 employees.
A lot of my hiring philosophy comes from that time. The people who applied for those jobs were either high school or college kids who wanted a part-time job, or they were adults who weren’t really skilled workers.
It was fascinating to me that I couldn’t predict who would be a good worker. I would hire these clean-cut young kids, and they would be lazy or not attentive to detail.
And then I would hire people who were in their 50s who didn’t look put together. But their commitment to the job was incredible. I’ve learned that you hire based on what’s inside people.
In start-ups, people who are great hires have grit and tenacity, because it’s hard and everything’s breaking all the time. It was a real lesson about the dangers of judging people based on appearances.
I ran those convenience stores for five years until my partner at the time told me about a technical sales job at Compuware. They taught me everything about tech, and my whole life changed.
To me, the difference between leadership and management is the commitment to unlock the employee. I’m passionate about building teams and looking to understand each person’s strengths and weaknesses, and helping them see their strengths.
Most people don’t see themselves very clearly. Our internal narratives prevent us from seeing our superpowers and our weaknesses. So it’s important to have mentors and leaders who are committed to helping you see yourself more clearly.
My philosophy is about helping people unlock what they’re really amazing at and help them understand their weaknesses enough to manage them, because you’re not really going to change who you are.
I’ve learned that really intelligent people operate best in a world where they have as much context as possible. My role is to provide context constantly — what’s the plan, and the why behind each decision so that people can align their priorities.
What are your thoughts on building culture?
One thing I recognize now is that culture isn’t about values; it’s about behaviors. And I think people often confuse the two things. I have values, and I am looking for certain values in the people I hire.
But I think the best cultural lists are the behaviors you want to cultivate. The problem with values like respect and courage is that everybody interprets them differently. They’re too ambiguous and open to interpretation. Instead of uniting us, they can create friction.
As I mentioned earlier, the two things that are most important to me are grit and integrity. And integrity is a big word, but to me it means telling the truth. It means doing what you say you’re going to do. It also means no politics, and that you’re not going to put yourself above the company.
I also look for self-awareness. Most of the people I’ve had to fire did not have self-awareness, so that when you give them feedback, they don’t react well to it, which means they’re never going to grow.
I think school teaches you some wrong lessons about life. You’re always graded on everything, and you start thinking that’s true about life, too. But that’s not true.
And so I see young people who are paralyzed about trying to find the right next step in their careers. So my advice is that it doesn’t really matter what job you take if you don’t really know what you want to do yet.
I took a job at a convenience store. I learned things about myself. I got to my next step. Now I’m a tech C.E.O.