They were young men, petty officers all, whose lives were lived at sea and then almost certainly lost there.
John Henry Hoagland III grew up in Killeen, Tex., and he spoke about serving his country when he was just 5 and still confronted with kindergarten. His family said he had joined the Junior Reserve Officer Training Corps in high school, and then visited recruiters for different branches of the military before deciding on the Navy, where his uncle and a grandfather had also served.
Aboard big ships plowing waters far from land, he found serenity and exhilaration. Cynthia Kimball, his mother, shared one of her son’s Facebook posts, written in June, that captured his feelings.
The destroyer John S. McCain collided with an oil tanker in the waters near Singapore on Monday. Ten sailors, including Petty Officer Hoagland, are presumed to have died despite the slim odds survivors could be found, said two Navy officials who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss confidential aspects of the investigation. They represented a scattered group of men with early and pointed desires to do service on the world’s oceans. They then became victims in the latest of a spate of accidents involving Navy vessels.
After 80 hours of looking across 2,100 square miles of water, the Navy suspended search and rescue efforts on Thursday. Attempts to find the bodies inside the ship continued, but were complicated by the heavy damage to the vessel. At least 20 divers from the Navy and the Marine Corps have been working underwater with hydraulic cutters to try to pierce the McCain’s crushed and flooded berthing compartments.
The crash occurred just two months after the deadly collision of another ship from the Navy’s Seventh Fleet, the destroyer Fitzgerald, which hit a freighter off the coast of Japan. Seven people died aboard the American ship. Two other Navy accidents occurred in Asia this year.
In the aftermath, the commander of the Seventh Fleet, the Navy’s largest overseas, was removed on Wednesday. On Thursday, Adm. Bill Moran, the Navy’s second-ranking officer, issued detailed instructions to the four-star admiral assigned to conduct a 60-day review into possible systemic problems plaguing Navy ships worldwide, especially the Seventh Fleet based in Japan.
The instructions direct Adm. Phil Davidson, the head of the Fleet Forces Command in Norfolk, Va., to examine issues including pace of operations, readiness, and whether the fleet was properly training officers and crews.
The cause of the latest crash remains under investigation. A pair of House Armed Services subcommittees on Wednesday said they would hold a joint hearing on Sept. 7 about readiness issues associated with the two destroyer collisions. Representative Rob Wittman, a Virginia Republican who heads the sea power subcommittee, is expected to meet on Monday in Japan with the new commander of the Seventh Fleet, Vice Adm. Phillip G. Sawyer. The Senate Armed Services Committee is also expected to hold hearings examining the accidents in September.
The sailors came from eight states and ranged in age from 20 to 39. Eight were in their 20s.
Inside the flooded ship, divers found the remains of Kenneth Aaron Smith, 22, an electronics technician, third class, from Cherry Hill, N.J. After growing up in Michigan, he moved to Virginia as a teenager, according to a report in The Detroit Free Press, and followed his grandfather and father into the Navy.
She last spoke to him last week. He had been badgering her to watch his favorite show, “Rick and Morty,” and she wanted to tell him that she finally had.
The allure of travel brought Jacob Daniel Drake, 21, to the Navy. An electronics technician, second class, from Cable, Ohio, he joined the Navy after high school.
Ms. Roberts said she had last spoken with Petty Officer Drake a little over a week ago. He inquired about her daughter, she said, who has been having health problems. She tried to talk with him about once a month, but she said he had never mentioned the recent crash involving the Fitzgerald.
“I think maybe he didn’t bring it up because I’m sure it bothered him and he didn’t want us to worry even more,” she said.
Pride was a big motivation for Charles Nathan Findley, 31, an electronics technician, first class, from tiny Amazonia, Mo. Fond of rebuilding cars, he, too, wanted to travel and make himself and his family proud, his sister, Amy Winters, told Fox 4, a television station in Kansas City, Mo.
One of the things that stood out about Corey George Ingram was his winning personality. Petty Officer Ingram, 28, was an information systems technician, second class, from Poughkeepsie, N.Y.
The other missing sailors are Dustin Louis Doyon, 26, an electronics technician, third class, from Suffield, Conn.; Abraham Lopez, 39, an interior communications electrician, first class, from El Paso; Kevin Sayer Bushell, 26, an electronics technician, second class, from Gaithersburg, Md; and Timothy Thomas Eckels Jr., 23, an information systems technician, second class, from Manchester, Md.
There was little question that the collision involving the Fitzgerald had gotten the attention of the McCain sailors. But it didn’t seem to worry them.
Ms. Kimball, Petty Officer Hoagland’s mother, said she had discussed that accident with her son.
