For two decades, Alberto Rodriguez has worked in the same cavernous garage along the border between Queens and Brooklyn, surrounded by the clang of metal and the rumbling of engines awaiting repair.
It turns out that he has also been toiling amid potentially dangerous levels of radiation.
Mr. Rodriguez’s shop, Los Primos Auto Repair and Sale, is one of six businesses at the intersection of Cooper and Irving Avenues in Ridgewood, Queens, that have been targeted for demolition as part of a cleanup plan released recently by the Environmental Protection Agency. The businesses are within a Superfund site, the term for sites covered by a program that finances the cleanup of hazardous waste.
The small, triangle-shaped tract, hemmed in on one side by an abandoned rail spur, does not look particularly active; the federal plan described it as occupied by, among other things, a “dilapidated warehouse.” But for business owners like Mr. Rodriguez, who have turned the block into a one-stop shop for automotive needs — it also houses a tire shop, a motorcycle repair shop and another auto repair shop — the proposed plan threatens to uproot well-established livelihoods.
Mr. Rodriguez’s shop sits atop land formerly occupied by the Wolff-Alport Chemical Company, which from the 1920s through the 1950s extracted metals from imported sand. In the process, the company produced waste containing two radioactive elements, thorium and uranium, which it disposed of by dumping the waste into sewers and perhaps also by burying it, according to the federal plan.
The E.P.A. has been aware of radioactive contamination at the site since at least 1988, but it was not until 2014 that the agency assigned Superfund status to the site. Before then, the E.P.A. installed interim protections, including placing slabs of concrete, lead and steel beneath floors and sidewalks to block radiation from emanating upward.
Those measures wreaked havoc with Mr. Rodriguez’s business, he said. The E.P.A. shut down half of his shop to install new flooring, then reopened it and closed the other half to complete the work. He had to operate at limited capacity for several months, and when word about the contamination started circulating, he lost customers. “People said, ‘He’s got radiation,’” Mr. Rodriguez recalled.
But at least he thought those months of disruption would be the end and not a prelude to permanent displacement.
“They should’ve done the right job from the beginning,” said Sandy Frayman, the owner of the motorcycle repair shop, Celtic Custom NYC, who opened his business after the interim measures were completed.
Several business owners said they had not noticed any health effects from working on the site and would be content to remain.
The health risks from the radiation at the site are small, said Dr. David Brenner, the director of the Center for Radiological Research at Columbia University Medical Center, who reviewed the E.P.A.’s risk estimates at a reporter’s request. If no further remediation were done at the site, a future resident would see an increased risk of cancer of about 0.005 percent, the plan predicted.
Walter Mugdan, an acting deputy regional administrator for the E.P.A., acknowledged that the site’s tenants “are not in any significant danger at all.” But the agency’s goal, he said, is to ensure that the site can be used in the future, perhaps even for residential development.
A public meeting is scheduled this month at a nearby day care center about the demolition plans. The day care center and a school in the area were investigated for radioactive contamination but were ultimately not included in the Superfund designation. Several parents leaving the school recently said they were not concerned about any contamination or had not heard about the investigation.
Any demolition would not be undertaken until 2019 or 2020 at the earliest, Mr. Mugdan said. About two dozen Superfund sites are ready for cleanup at any given time, he said, but because of limited funding, usually work begins on only six to eight each year. The projected cost of the government’s preferred plan for the Wolff-Alport cleanup is more than $39 million.
The E.P.A. often seeks to hold companies responsible for the contamination financially accountable for the cleanup, but Wolff-Alport has been defunct for decades. Mr. Mugdan said his agency would try to determine if the company ever sold itself to any existing firms.
The protracted timeline for demolition offers small consolation to the site’s current tenants.
“The rent is crazy. I can’t find a place like that,” said Mr. Rodriguez, who pays $3,600 a month in rent, gesturing to the street outside his garage, where he can park cars when he needs extra space. The E.P.A. will offer small businesses up to $25,000 to help them set up at another location, but Mr. Rodriguez is unclear about what he might actually be entitled to.
Mr. Rodriguez, at least, is more informed than Andy Bermeo, who owns the other auto repair shop on the site. When asked about a blue E.P.A. folder his neighbors had received with information about the cleanup, Mr. Bermeo said he had never received one, although his shop is marked on the agency’s map of the contaminated site.
When asked if the lack of communication meant his business might not be affected, Mr. Bermeo shrugged.
