Tronc, the parent company of The Los Angeles Times, abruptly replaced the newspaper’s top leadership on Monday in a shake-up that stunned many in the newsroom.
Ross Levinsohn, a longtime media executive who held a senior position at Fox’s digital group and was once considered a top candidate to lead Yahoo, was named publisher and chief executive of The Times. Jim Kirk, who until this month was editor and publisher of The Chicago Sun-Times, will be the interim executive editor and will run the newsroom’s day-to-day operations.
Mr. Levinsohn and Mr. Kirk, who joined Tronc less than two weeks ago after the sale of The Sun-Times, will replace Davan Maharaj, who has been The Times’s publisher and editor since March 2016, when Tronc combined the two roles across its newspapers. Several other leaders at the paper, including Marc Duvoisin, a managing editor; Megan Garvey, the deputy managing editor for digital; and Matt Doig, the assistant managing editor for investigations, were also fired. Lawrence Ingrassia, another managing editor and a former editor at The New York Times, recently said he was retiring.
The shake-up at one of the country’s most storied newspapers occurred roughly a year and a half after Tronc’s new leadership team, led by the Chicago entrepreneur Michael W. Ferro Jr., gained control and began shifting the company’s focus to digital and pushing a technology-driven approach to journalism. The company, formerly called Tribune Publishing, which also owns The Chicago Tribune and The Baltimore Sun, rebuffed a takeover bid from Gannett last year after a bitter public process.
Mr. Dearborn said that The Times was not transforming itself fast enough on the digital side under its current leadership and that Mr. Levinsohn was hired to expedite that change.
Though Monday’s purge surprised some in the newsroom, internal grumbling about the newsroom’s leadership had surfaced recently and some of the paper’s journalists had sent letters of complaint to Tronc executives, according to several people familiar with the complaints, who spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss internal matters. Tension arose between Tronc’s leadership and Mr. Maharaj over proposed budget cuts, which Mr. Maharaj was resisting, one of the people said.
Mr. Maharaj was not available for comment.
This is not the first leadership overhaul at The Times in recent years. In 2015, the paper’s publisher, Austin Beutner, was fired after only a year in the job, a move that sharpened divisions between The Times and its Chicago-based parent company.