Marvin Billups’s daughter told her father that he had been acting differently in the last couple of months. He seemed frustrated and had a short fuse, he recalled her saying.
Mr. Billups, 49, doesn’t deny his daughter’s observations.
He is one of more than 1,700 Spectrum workers in New York and New Jersey who have been on strike for almost five months after hitting an impasse in collective bargaining negotiations with the company.
“Striking has changed me,” Mr. Billups said.
Mr. Billups, a foreman who oversees cable construction in Upper Manhattan, has foregone almost $30,000 in income and has relied mostly on unemployment benefits and his union’s strike fund. His family has made certain adjustments: his wife is working longer hours, he walks to save on gas and is more frugal at the grocery store.
On Friday, union workers remained embroiled in a contract dispute with Charter Communications, which offers cable, internet and telephone services under the name Spectrum. The strike has drawn the attention of the mayor’s office, which has begun a formal audit into Charter’s practice of hiring contractors from outside New York to serve its customers during the strike.
Charter, the second-largest cable operator in the United States after Comcast, provided service to about 26.2 million residential and business customers nationwide in 2016. The company established its presence in New York City in May that year when it paid more than $70 billion for Bright House Networks and Time Warner Cable, which had a nonexclusive franchise agreement in Manhattan, Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island through 2020.
The strike began on March 28, three days before the existing contract’s expiration date.
Union leaders said workers walked out after Charter representatives proposed moving employees into a company 401(k) pension account and health plan that they described as “substandard.” Workers want to retain the health and defined benefit pension plans they have, which have been managed for decades by an independent board of trustees, leaders said.
The workers on strike include technicians, dispatchers, constructors, engineers, and warehouse workers, Mr. Jordan said.
John Bonomo, a spokesman for Charter, said the company’s goal is to offer pay increases and to abandon the current “failing” benefit plan.
In the last round of negotiations, Charter offered workers an average 22 percent wage increase and “comprehensive” retirement and health benefits, including a 401(k) that provides a dollar-for-dollar match up to 6 percent of eligible pay, Mr. Bonomo said in a statement.
Both sides also disagree over the terms of the old contract. That contract, Mr. Jordan said, was invalid because the National Labor Relations Board affirmed in 2015 a judge’s finding that the parties had not reached “a meeting of the minds” on all of its parts. The company has argued the contract was valid and that the strike is illegal because it started before the contract expired.
The work stoppage led Charter to hire contractors to serve customers during the strike. The union has argued that Charter did not properly vet the contractors and has violated the city’s franchise agreement by hiring vendors from outside New York City.
“We saw contractors with license plates from all over the country,” Mr. Jordan said.
Charter has argued that the company hired workers mostly from New York and that it has complied with its franchise agreement with the city.
Walter Smith, a cable technician at Spectrum for six years who lives in the Bronx, received an eviction notice in July after falling behind on his bills, he said. The father of two has not worked since early October, when he had surgery to remove a benign tumor on his head. When he was ready return to work in April, workers had just gone on strike.
The city has received about 9 percent more service and installation complaints from Spectrum customers and potential customers in the four months since the strike began compared with the four months before it, according to data from the city’s Department of Information Technology and Telecommunications.
The company’s networks have been subject to more than 110 acts of vandalism between March 28 and mid-July, Mr. Bonomo said. Two cases in Queens left 95,000 customers without service, he added.
The mayor’s office is conducting an audit to ensure Charter is in compliance with its franchise agreement. Any findings from the audit will be taken into consideration when the term of the agreement ends in 2020, Freddi Goldstein, a deputy press secretary for the mayor’s office, said.
Mayor Bill de Blasio said during a television interview in late July that the city began a formal audit after his office tried unsuccessfully to get information from Charter to resolve the issue of its contractor hiring practices.
Spectrum and union leaders last met on Aug. 7 and are scheduled to meet again on Tuesday.