331 pp. Random House. $30.
A few of the women interviewed in the late 1970s and early 1980s for “The Unwomanly Face of War,” Svetlana Alexievich’s magnificent and harrowing chronicle of Soviet women during World War II, did stay at home waiting for their men. But they are vastly outnumbered in her account by those who signed up to go to the front as pilots, nurses, surgeons, tank drivers, scouts, traffic controllers, sappers and more. As in her books about children during World War II, the Chernobyl nuclear disaster, the Soviet-Afghan war and the Soviet Union’s collapse — a body of work for which she won the Nobel Prize in Literature in 2015 — Alexievich charts an extraordinary event through intimate interviews with its ordinary witnesses. Richard Pevear and Larissa Volokhonsky’s fluent translation of a revised edition of this first book in the series breathes new life into the memories of the war’s female combatants.
Alexievich gives the lie to any assumption that war need be an “unwomanly” business. Even as her subjects themselves tend to hold traditional views of femininity, they make the point that their beauty, their empathy and their ability to provoke compassion in others gave them special advantages in wartime. “He told me that my smile brought him back to life, from the other world, as they say. … A woman’s smile,” a surgeon says about a soldier she met again after the war. Maria Smirnova, one of the book’s many medics who managed to survive years of dragging the bodies of wounded troops from under fire, recalls how the German and Soviet guns both went silent while she entered a no-man’s-land to rescue an artillerist.
Distilling her interviews into immersive monologues, Alexievich presents less a straightforward oral history of World War II than a literary excavation of memory itself. Overlaying the decades that separated the women’s testimonials from the war are the nearly two additional decades that had passed by the time she produced this post-Soviet edition. “I’m trying to remember the person I was when I was writing this book,” Alexievich reflects in her new introduction. “That person is no more, just as the country in which we then lived is no more.” Resurrecting the ghosts of both the early 1980s and her Soviet self, Alexievich includes several passages that the censors cut and even some that she independently threw out. Her admission of “my self-censorship, my own ban” points to the culture of silence that may have dissuaded the Soviet Union’s female combatants from telling their stories for themselves. By recalling her own self-silencing, Alexievich takes a place among her subjects and masterfully sets out to correct the record.