MANILA — Kian Loyd delos Santos, 17, is just one of thousands of Filipinos shot and killed by the police since President Rodrigo Duterte began a sweeping crackdown on drugs last year.
But the youth’s death last week in Caloocan City, outside Manila, has had an effect that no other police killing has: The Senate, though dominated by allies of the president, has opened an investigation.
Mr. Duterte, known for his brazen promises of impunity for police officers who kill people suspected of using or selling drugs, has personally ordered that those responsible for Mr. delos Santos’s death be taken into custody.
The developments have critics of Mr. Duterte’s drug war cautiously optimistic that the Philippine public, which has been broadly supportive of the crackdown, is starting to see it differently.
Mr. delos Santos, a high school student, was among 96 people killed in the Manila area last week in what the police called a “one-time, big-time” crackdown on drug dealers and addicts in the capital and several sprawling suburbs. It was the bloodiest week of the antidrug campaign that Mr. Duterte started after taking office last summer, promising to rid the country of corruption and crime.
The police said that Mr. delos Santos had been carrying a handgun when they encountered him on Aug. 16, and that they had shot him in self-defense after he “fought it out” with them. The police have a term for that, “nanlaban,” which has become associated in the Philippines with police killings.
But since the teenager’s death, surveillance camera footage has emerged of police officers forcefully leading him away — contradicting accounts of a spontaneous shootout. Witnesses said they had seen officers dragging Mr. delos Santos to a cul-de-sac near a community basketball court, handing him a gun and telling him to run — only to shoot him as he turned to do so.
An autopsy found that Mr. delos Santos had been shot at least twice in the head, at close range. At his wake, his father told reporters that a gun had been found in the youth’s left hand, though he was right-handed. He had wanted to be a police officer, the father added.
The police have killed more than 3,500 people since the beginning of Mr. Duterte’s crackdown, according to their own count, and they note that the vast majority resisted arrest. While many Filipinos have expressed doubts about that point, rarely if ever have there been surveillance camera images contradicting a police account of a shooting, as in Mr. delos Santos’s case.
The outcry has Mr. Duterte and his allies scrambling to contain the fallout. Some of the president’s supporters in the Senate crossed party lines to vote in favor of an investigation. A Senate hearing on the case will be held on Thursday.
The president added that he had ordered that the officers involved in the teenager’s death be taken into custody — a reversal from his frequent promise to pardon officers who kill suspects without provocation.
The American ambassador to the Philippines, Sung Kim, offered his condolences to Mr. delos Santos’s family and said he hoped that the “investigations lead to full accountability,” a rare foray by an American diplomat into a volatile domestic issue.
Mr. Santiago, the rights advocate, said the surveillance footage in Mr. delos Santos’s case proved what critics had long argued: that extrajudicial killings in the Philippines are routinely passed off as “nanlaban” shootouts. Mr. Duterte should order a far broader investigation, he added.
“His sincerity can only be determined in his resolve to make perpetrators of crimes accountable, including those involved in his anti-illegal-drugs campaign,” Mr. Santiago said.
While Ms. Hontiveros noted that it was too early to say if the episode would turn the tide against police killings, she said she was hopeful that the public would demand accountability from Mr. Duterte.
Reflecting growing indignation, thousands of rights activists and others braved strong rains on Monday to show their support for Mr. delos Santos’s family.
Ramon C. Casiple, a political analyst at the Institute for Political and Electoral Reform, said that the accounts from witnesses and the forensic evidence in his death had fueled outrage.
Mr. Duterte has shown himself to be very resilient, however, and his down-to-earth appeal, rooted in a leftist anti-establishment streak, should serve him well, analysts said.
That Filipinos welcomed the president’s promise to punish Mr. delos Santos’s killers is too little, too late, Ms. Hontiveros said.
