Good morning on this frown-inducing Friday.
A listening device, slightly smaller than a football, rests on the sea floor of the New York Bight, the body of water that stretches between Montauk Point in Long Island and Cape May, N.J.
The contraption is named Melville.
It’s an appropriate moniker for what it does: It tracks whales in New York’s busy waters by listening, processing and sending data via satellite to scientists in near-real time.
Since last summer, the device has been detecting whale calls as part of the largest survey of New York’s whales.
Scientists at the Wildlife Conservation Society and Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, the largest independent ocean research center in the United States, hope to better understand where whales are in relation to shipping lanes and wind-farm development in and around one of the nation’s busiest shipping ports.
We followed up with Howard Rosenbaum and Mark F. Baumgartner, the principal investigators of the project, to find out what they’ve learned about our whales in the past year.
The scientists have heard more North Atlantic right whales here than they had expected, given the whales’ migration path (from Canada to Florida), Mr. Rosenbaum said. From October to April, there were 34 detections — or possible detections — of whales vocalizing. That finding is important for conservation, Mr. Rosenbaum said, because the whales were in the New York Bight at least once before mandatory speed restrictions were enforced.
The listening device, which is tethered to a buoy, is tooled to hear four whale species: fin, humpback, sei and North Atlantic right whales. During the first nine or so months of the project, the device detected one or more of those species.
So can an unexperienced whale-watcher catch a glimpse of these massive creatures without any sophisticated equipment?
Tom Paladino, the captain of the American Princess, a whale-watching vessel that operates out of Riis Landing in Breezy Point, Queens, said passengers can expect about an 80 percent chance of a whale sighting this time of year. On a recent Saturday outing, we spotted K-Cup, a juvenile humpback.
This is the prime time to go whale-watching in New York Bight, Mr. Paladino added, with the season for sightings between May and November.
Here comes that rainy day feeling again.
We’re expecting showers all day, with thunderstorms possible this evening.
Hair forecast: Whale-splashed by Free Willy.
But Saturday and Sunday should sparkle, with highs in the 80s and enough sunshine to make us forget how under-the-weather Friday was.
• Liberty at Sun, 7 p.m. Yankees at Red Sox, 7:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). New York Red Bulls at Portland Timbers, 10 p.m. (FS1).
• Yankees at Red Sox, 7:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Marlins, 7:10 p.m. (WPIX).
• Mets host Marlins, 1:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Red Sox, 1:35 p.m. (YES). Liberty host Lynx, 3 p.m. New York City F.C. host New England Revolution, 6 p.m. (YES).
Imagine Park Slope, Prospect Heights and the Gowanus Canal under siege.
In late August 1776, those parts of the borough endured intense combat between the British and Continental armies in the Battle of Brooklyn, a significant battle of the American Revolution.
The British triumphed, and nearly 3,000 Americans lost their lives.
More than 240 years later, Brooklyn remembers.
The Old Stone House in Washington Park, where the battle took place, is commemorating the conflict — and celebrating New York’s role in our country’s road to independence — with a week of events around Brooklyn.
You can participate in Colonial Day at Fort Greene Park on Saturday, or pay respects at a memorial in Washington Park on Sunday.
Next week, you can learn about the history on a guided walk through the neighborhood or visit the family-friendly Witness to War exhibit, which honors the 18th-century Brooklyn residents who contributed to the effort.
And next weekend, at the Green-Wood Cemetery, you can join a gathering of British and American re-enactors for music, dancing, storytelling and more, or attend a ceremony with cannons, horses, re-enactments and a parade.
