A federal court invalidated two of Texas’ congressional districts on Tuesday, concluding that they violated the Constitution and the Voting Rights Act by diluting the voting power of minorities.
In a 107-page ruling — part of a long-running legal battle — a three-judge panel of the United States District Court for the Western District of Texas found that District 27, which includes Corpus Christi, had been drawn to deny voters in a heavily Hispanic county “their opportunity to elect a candidate of their choice,” and that race had been the primary factor in drawing District 35, a narrow strip that stretches from San Antonio to Austin.
The judges, however, upheld the validity of other districts, including ones that had been challenged in Houston and in the Dallas/Fort Worth area.
The panel, in San Antonio, ruled that state officials had adopted the map in question in 2013 as part of a deliberate strategy to maintain “discrimination or unconstitutional effects” while preventing voters from challenging those effects. If Texas legislators do not begin a redistricting process, the court will hold a hearing on Sept. 5 to discuss remedies.
Ken Paxton, the Texas attorney general, said in a statement that his office would ask the United States Supreme Court to hear the case. Opponents of the districts that the court upheld could also seek Supreme Court review.
The ruling was the latest in a six-year dispute stemming from Texas’ redistricting process after the 2010 census. Because of the legal challenges, the initial maps drawn by lawmakers in 2011 — parts of which the same court deemed unlawful this March — never went into effect. The 2012 elections were conducted with interim maps drawn by the court — ones the judges said they had been forced to put together hastily because those elections were looming.
In a statement, Mr. Paxton praised the parts of the ruling that went in Texas’ favor, but said the invalidation of Districts 27 and 35 was “puzzling considering the Legislature adopted the congressional map the same court itself adopted in 2012, and the Obama-era Department of Justice did not bring any claims against the map.” Spokesmen for Gov. Greg Abbott did not respond to an email requesting comment Tuesday evening.
The judges, for their part, said they had never indicated that the interim maps were suitable for long-term use.
In addition to the League of United Latin American Citizens, the plaintiffs in the case, which was consolidated from several lawsuits, include the Mexican American Legislative Caucus, the Texas State Conference of N.A.A.C.P. Units, three members of Congress and Texas voters.