WASHINGTON — Investigators for the special counsel leading the Russia inquiry executed a search warrant late last month at the Northern Virginia home of President Trump’s former campaign manager, Paul J. Manafort, for tax documents and foreign banking records, according to a person familiar with the matter.
The search is a sign that the investigation into Mr. Manafort has broadened, and is the most significant public step investigators have taken since the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, was appointed in May. Investigators are expected to deploy a wide array of similar measures — including interviews and subpoenas — in the coming months as they move forward with the intensifying inquiry.
It was not clear why Mr. Mueller did not simply ask Mr. Manafort’s lawyers for the documents. Executing a search warrant is considered among the most aggressive steps used by authorities, who must first demonstrate they have probable cause to believe they will find evidence that a crime occurred. The searches also often become public.
Legal experts said that Mr. Mueller might be trying to send a message to Mr. Manafort about the severity of the investigation, and to pressure him into cooperating.
A spokesman for Mr. Mueller declined to comment. The person familiar with the inquiry spoke on the condition of anonymity because he did not want to be identified discussing a continuing federal investigation.
The warrant, demanding tax and foreign banking records, suggests that investigators are looking at criminal charges related to the federal Bank Secrecy Act, which requires Americans to report their foreign banking accounts.
It was already known that Mr. Manafort was under investigation for his business dealings with his son-in-law; his role in a meeting on June 9, 2016, between Trump campaign officials and Russians; and whether his work for the Ukrainian government violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act.
Mr. Manafort’s spokesman confirmed that an F.B.I. raid was carried out around July 25, but provided no details on the documents that might have been taken.
“Mr. Manafort has consistently cooperated with law enforcement and other serious inquiries and did so on this occasion as well,” said Jason Maloni, the spokesman. News of the search warrant was first reported on Wednesday by The Washington Post.
The warrant is the latest troubling development for Mr. Manafort, a longtime Republican operative who has spent the last couple of decades working abroad as a consultant to foreign governments.
Mr. Manafort was hired by Mr. Trump’s campaign in early 2016 as it prepared for a potential delegate fight at the Republican National Convention. In June, he was named campaign chairman but resigned just two months later amid reports that he had received millions of dollars in off-the-book payments for his consulting work in Ukraine.
Since then, Mr. Manafort has been battered by a series of disclosures that have raised questions about his business dealings, as well as his participation in the June 2016 meeting between Trump campaign officials and Russians claiming to have damaging information on Hillary Clinton.
The search was carried out at Mr. Manafort’s home in Alexandria, Va., shortly after he met with investigators for the Senate Intelligence Committee on July 25. In that meeting, Mr. Manafort answered questions and provided investigators with notes from the June 2016 meeting with the Russians.
One of the issues the special counsel’s office has already examined is whether Mr. Manafort’s work for the Ukranian government violated the Foreign Agents Registration Act. It is not clear how seriously prosecutors are taking that matter, in part because the government rarely brings those cases to trial. In July, Mr. Manafort’s consulting firm retroactively filed forms with the Justice Department to be in compliance with the act.
According to financial records, Mr. Manafort had bank accounts in Cyprus — a well-known tax haven that is often used for money laundering. The banks were used during the years Mr. Manafort worked in Ukraine as a consultant to the pro-Russia Party of Regions.
In his July filing, Mr. Manafort disclosed his lobbying efforts in Ukraine through early 2014, when his main client there, President Viktor F. Yanukovych, was ousted in a popular uprising and fled to Russia.
The New York Times reported in June that federal authorities were examining real estate deals by Mr. Manafort’s son-in-law, Jeffrey Yohai, for luxury homes in New York and California. The deals were funded by Mr. Manafort, and F.B.I. agents have reviewed financial records related to Mr. Yohai, who has been accused in a lawsuit of defrauding investors.