Stuck in traffic, Ms. Washington, who is African-American, pulled out her phone and began to snap photographs. “It was something to look at, so many white people, more than our race, out there, trying to protest, fighting for us,” she recalled.
It was in the midst of this moment of gleeful surprise that the reality of what they were fighting for hit home: a Dodge Challenger driven by an Ohio man slammed into the back of her car, sending her hard against the steering wheel — and catapulting her into a national debate on race relations in America.
Ms. Washington’s car was pushed into a van in front of her. A woman in a green shirt lay on her car’s windshield. Another woman, Heather D. Heyer, was on the ground to the side of the Toyota’s rear, dying. Strands of what was apparently Ms. Heyer’s red hair clung to the trunk of Ms. Washington’s car.
The Dodge that had rammed into them flew into reverse, knocking pedestrians out of the way as it fled. Furious counterprotesters banged on his car to try to make him stop.
The driver is now in jail, charged with second-degree murder in the death of Ms. Heyer.
“People actually came here to harm us,” Ms. Washington’s sister, Micah Washington, said.
But it was not the malice that Tadrint Washington dwelled on, or even the people who had come from near and far to rally for white control of America. It was the white people who had come to do battle for a cause she viewed as not inherently their own.
But not, she added, by attending protests. On Thursday, she learned her right ankle was broken. And she is too scared to leave her apartment.
The sisters filed a lawsuit Tuesday, in a state court in Charlottesville, against more than two dozen white nationalists and groups that organized the march to protest the removal of a statue of the Confederate general Robert E. Lee from a city park. Ms. Heyer was one of hundreds who gathered for a counterprotest.
The events of the weekend have taken center stage in the White House and beyond, in part because of the shocking finale, and in part because of President Trump’s muted reaction, which was criticized as failing to adequately condemn white supremacist groups and their tactics.
As for the crash, Mr. Spencer said that he was “deeply saddened by the death,” but that perhaps the driver, James A. Fields Jr., 20, was innocent of murder.
Eli Mosley, a representative of another defendant, Identity Evropa, said that the white nationalists had not incited violence and that the lawsuit was without merit.
Mr. Fields was also named in the lawsuit. His criminal defense lawyer, Denise Y. Lunsford, declined to comment.
The Washington sisters said the force of the impact signaled to them that he had his foot firmly on the gas pedal. He did not stop to help the injured, Micah Washington said. “I looked back, and he was backing straight up, not stopping, not trying to brake for anybody,” she said.
She said she had not had any big breakdowns, as her sister had. “I just kind of randomly cry throughout the day,” she said.
They believe God placed them in the car’s path for a reason: to serve as a buffer between Mr. Fields and the throngs of protesters who were walking down the street that afternoon. Maybe, Tadrint Washington said, Mr. Trump will see their interview and “open his eyes” to understand that all those white nationalists did not come to Charlottesville for a statue.
“They didn’t come for peace,” she said.