DealBook|Morning Agenda: Are Markets Due for a Reckoning?
Morning Agenda: Are Markets Due for a Reckoning?
Nearly a decade after the beginning of the 2008 financial crisis, concerns are rising that euphoric markets may be headed for a hard fall.
Technology companies have been an important driver behind the increase in financial markets in recent years, with seven of the world’s 10 most valuable companies now coming from that sector.
The so-called Faang stocks — Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Netflix and the Google parent Alphabet — have had some of the biggest gains in the past 12 months.
And a stunning amount of money (more than $60 billion a year for the past three years) has flowed into the tech sector through venture capitalists and private equity funds.
• Many of the gains have been concentrated around a small number of stocks, rather than resulting in a broader rise.
The Dow Jones industrial average hit a record high last week, but more than a third of its gains since the beginning of March were driven by a single stock: the aircraft manufacturer Boeing.
And Bloomberg News reported on Sunday that 70 percent of the gains in the Hang Seng Index in Hong Kong this year were driven by just seven stocks.
• Tech companies may face increasing scrutiny from regulators.
Google was fined a record $2.7 billion this summer by European Union antitrust officials for unfairly favoring some of its own services over rivals. The Europeans also have gone after Apple for $14.5 billion what they see as unpaid tax and have opened a separate inquiry into Amazon’s tax practices in Europe.
In China, the government appears to be limiting the use of software that allows people to surpass the Great Firewall — the nickname for a sophisticated set of internet filters used to stop the public from accessing foreign news outlets, as well as Facebook, Google and Twitter.
• Qualcomm is providing money, expertise and engineering to help China develop cutting-edge technology as the American giant, and many of its rivals, seek to gain a greater presence in China. But concerns are rising in Washington about China’s efforts to gain access to American expertise.
• Bloomberg News reports that Apple is planning to release a version of its Apple Watch this year that can connect directly to mobile networks, limiting the need to carry a cellphone to make and receive calls.
When he ran for office, President Trump said he would bring business leaders into government and use the best corporate practices to make it more efficient.
Many expected that Rex W. Tillerson, the former chief executive of Exxon Mobil, would apply those types of management skills as secretary of state — namely picking a trusted staff and delegating small issues, so he could focus on the big ones.
But critics are unimpressed, saying that Mr. Tillerson has failed to do so and that his efforts to reorganize the State Department have contributed to a paralysis in the agency and a lack of direction on foreign policy.
Mr. Tillerson has failed to nominate anyone to fill most of the department’s highest-ranking positions and is instead working with a small group of personal aides to review operations.
A spokesman for Mr. Tillerson said that he was focused on simply tackling problems that had been ignored by his predecessors and, as he has learned more about the department, he has uncovered more issues in its bureaucracy.
Sprint, the cellular network operator controlled by SoftBank of Japan, continues to seek a deal to make it bigger and a more formidable competitor to American wireless giants Verizon and AT&T.
Masayoshi Son, the Japanese telecommunications mogul behind SoftBank, is known as an almost-compulsive deal maker and is exploring a complex takeover that would combine Sprint with the cable behemoth Charter Communications.
Charter has expressed little interest in an alliance, saying it had no desire to buy Sprint, which is worth about roughly a third of Charter’s $99 billion value.
SoftBank pursued a combination of Sprint with T-Mobile, but ended those talks in 2014 after drawing strong opposition from the Obama administration.
Sprint also has had talks in recent years with Charter and Comcast about offering its wireless service to their cable and broadband customers.
For Sprint, joining with a cable company would give it greater resources to upgrade its network to 5G and keep pace with rivals.
Local leaders who have actively recruited foreign companies and overseas investment to bolster their economies are increasingly concerned about the Trump administration’s talk on trade.
As the White House moves to redefine its international trading relationships, foreign companies have remained an important backbone for local economies throughout the United States.
Tennessee has hit a record low jobless rate as dozens of foreign companies have built plants and created thousands of jobs in Chattanooga and the surrounding region.
But political and business leaders in Hamilton County, where Mr. Trump won a majority, are concerned that protectionist policies could ultimately end up hurting consumers and local workers.
