The carnage — the chaos, the cries and the death of a woman — began to unspool over a few stunning seconds on Saturday: James Alex Fields Jr., the police said, aimed his sleek Dodge Challenger and slammed it into a crowd in Charlottesville, Va.
Although the crash was a grisly coda to a day of clashes between white nationalists and their opponents, family members, acquaintances and internet posts suggested that Mr. Fields had mostly gone unnoticed by the authorities and researchers, even as he trafficked in radical views and unnerving behavior long before the outbreak of violence.
As a young man in Kentucky, he sometimes espoused Nazi ideology at school. A military career ended in less than four months. On Saturday, before the crash that left Heather D. Heyer, 32, dead, and 19 others hurt, he stood in Charlottesville, donned a white shirt and clutched a shield that bore a symbol of the so-called alt-right. He is expected to appear in court on Monday to face an array of charges, including a count of second-degree murder; the federal authorities have opened a civil-rights inquiry.
Mr. Fields spent most of his life in northern Kentucky and was raised near Cincinnati. His father was killed in a car accident in 1996, months before he was born.
Mr. Fields’s mother, Samantha Bloom, told The Toledo Blade that she did not regularly discuss politics with her son and that he had not expressed extremist views. But others who knew Mr. Fields, especially from his teenage years, said that his demeanor and opinions had troubled them for years.
“On many occasions there were times he would scream obscenities, whether it be about Hitler or racial slurs,” a woman who attended middle school with Mr. Fields in Florence, Ky., said in an email on Sunday.
“He wasn’t afraid to make you feel unsafe,” said the woman, who was among the students who said Mr. Fields had made them feel unnerved.
“A lot of boys get interested in the Germans and Nazis because they’re interested in World War II,” the teacher, Derek Weimer, told The Cincinnati Enquirer. “But James took it to another level.” Mr. Fields was “a very bright kid but very misguided and disillusioned,” Mr. Weimer said.
The sources of Mr. Fields’s ideology were unclear on Sunday, but his Facebook page included memes and symbols associated with the far right.
Mr. Fields was generally quiet, acquaintances said, and filled his time playing video games and working at a local grocery store. He and his mother eventually moved to the Toledo, Ohio, area, and Mr. Fields, a registered Republican, voted in the March 2016 presidential primary. By Saturday, he had driven his Challenger, his first car, to Charlottesville. He had told his mother that he was going to an event for the alt-right, a far-right fringe movement that embraces white nationalism.
But in Charlottesville, Mr. Fields stood among men believed to be associated with Vanguard America, a group whose manifesto declares that “a government based in the natural law must not cater to the false notion of equality.” After the crash, it sought to distance itself from Mr. Fields.
