James Van Der Beek plays a fictional version of the D.J. Diplo — squint to see the likeness — in Viceland’s first scripted series. And Greg Garcia uses outlandish tales to scare the daylights out of vacationers.
THE GUEST BOOK 10 p.m. on TBS. Greg Garcia has turned his habit of writing fictional stories in the guest books of rental cabins, the better to freak out the next renters, into a series. The setting is a tiny cottage in a small mountain town, where a different set of vacationers is featured in each episode. The townies include Kellie Martin, Garret Dillahunt and Laura Bell Bundy; Michael Rapaport, Jenna Fischer, Michaela Watkins, Margo Martindale and Jaime Pressly are a few of the guests.
THE CHRIS GETHARD SHOW 11 p.m. on truTV. Mr. Gethard moves his comedy call-in show, with its panel of oddball friends, now starting its third season, from Fusion to truTV. It will also air live, with a 10-second delay.
LOLLAPALOOZA 6:30 p.m. on Red Bull TV. This Chicago festival is back for a 26th year, with a lineup including Muse, Lorde, Blink-182, Wiz Khalifa, the Shins, alt-J, Run the Jewels, Cage the Elephant, the Head and the Heart, Kaskade and Glass Animals.
GOOD FORTUNE: THE JOHN PAUL DEJORIA STORY (2017) on Amazon and iTunes. Early in this documentary, Mr. DeJoria is shown on “Shark Tank,” partnering with an inventor who refused to raise the price of a product he sold to farmers. That scene sums up the ethos of Mr. DeJoria, the billionaire co-founder of Paul Mitchell hair products and Patrón tequila, who, in his previous life, was deeply in debt and even homeless, and hung out with the Hells Angels. After finding work as an encyclopedia salesman, he discovered his niche in hair product sales — and boom. These days, Mr. DeJoria uses his wealth to help Paul Watson of the Sea Shepherd Conservation Society wage war against whale poachers, and supports emergency workers and the police with his Peace Love Happiness motorcycle ride. You might assume that Mr. DeJoria is a saint, as celebrity friends (Michelle Phillips, Arianna Huffington and Dan Aykroyd, who narrates) extol his virtues in a film where the only negative moments are the bad situations he climbed out of. But you’ll feel good watching it.