
The move is a bold step for an unpretentious company, made all the more noteworthy because it is taking place in one of Manhattan’s pricier neighborhoods: TriBeCa.
The Flea is perhaps best known for “The Guys,” staged in response to the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, about a fire captain and a journalist writing eulogies for firefighters killed at ground zero, just a few blocks south of the Flea. Among the actors over the 13-month run: Bill Murray, Susan Sarandon and Sigourney Weaver.
The Flea is also having a Broadway debut of sorts this season: A play it commissioned in 2011, “The Parisian Woman,” is to open in November at the Hudson Theater, with Uma Thurman starring.
The relocation project has been in the works for a long time. The company, worried about skyrocketing rent at its previous location, bought the new site, which in the 18th-century, housed a hospital, and, more recently, a collection agency, in 2009, and then spent years raising money to build and operate the new facility. The move is expected to cost $25 million, of which the company has raised $23 million; the company has an annual budget of $1.6 million and a staff of 10.
The building, designed by Architecture Research Office, has a simple chocolate-brick facade, with a glowing-green vertical marquee above a black steel awning; in recent days, the Flea, seeking to connect with its new neighborhood, has been offering free lemonade to passers-by in exchange for their email addresses.
The Flea kept the east and west walls of the building, but rebuilt the rest; the roof was raised to create space for a mezzanine, and the cellar was lowered. There are offices, a costume shop, dressing rooms and non-gendered bathrooms (natch).
Bucking a trend in arts financing, the Flea opted not to sell naming rights to its theaters, but instead to name them for significant figures in the company’s history. Each space is identified by a color from the theater’s orange, purple and green logo.
In the basement is the 46-seat Siggy, a proscenium theater (with seats from a Missouri church), named for Ms. Weaver, who is Mr. Simpson’s wife and a longtime Flea supporter.
On the first floor is the Pete, a multipurpose space named for the late playwright A. R. Gurney, who debuted 10 plays at the Flea. (The theater is producing a memorial for him at Broadway’s Music Box Theater on Sept. 12.) The Pete is attached to the rear garden, and the Flea is imagining that adventurous artists will find ways to stage performances combining the indoor and outdoor spaces; it can seat 40 people inside and another 40 outside.
On the second floor is the 99-to-120-seat Sam, a black box named for the agent Sam Cohn. Its seats were salvaged from the Flea’s White Street space.
“They are three unique spaces that challenge artists and that lend themselves to unique stories, and we should be able to welcome in other artistic groups more,” said Niegel Smith, the current artistic director, who will direct the first show at the Sam, a freestyled hip-hop coming-of-age story called “Syncing Ink,” by NSangou Njikam, which begins performances Sept. 25.
The Flea’s previous home had two theaters, with 74 and 40 seats. There will be a variety of nods to the company’s history in the new building, including the display of a black leather jacket owned by Elizabeth Swados, a composer who presented four works at the Flea.
Some familiar Flea programming will continue, including Serials, a late-night play competition featuring free beer. There will be new programs as well, including Cereals (get it?), a Serials spinoff for 5-to-9-year-olds. The plays will be 10 minutes long, and instead of beer there will be mini cereal boxes.
Also new: Flea Fridays, which will be preshow happy hour-lobby performances.
One feature of the Flea that hasn’t changed: Its resident company of actors, the Bats, whose members appear in many productions, is unpaid. “The Bats are a volunteer company, and we are at their service here at the Flea,” said Carol Ostrow, the Flea’s producing director.