It took the Yankees nearly eight hours to complete a 2-hour 52-minute game on Wednesday, in part because of a violent rainstorm that soaked Yankee Stadium after the seventh inning and in part because of the threat of a storm that never arrived.
According to the Yankees’ chief operating officer, Lonn Trost, the start time was determined by baseball officials who expected the heavy downpour to arrive around the original start time.
The answer, of course, was wait. And wait. And wait.
The Yankees waited for a rainstorm that never came, and then they waited through a rainstorm that seemed as if it would never end.
And they waited for the offense to get a hit with a runner in scoring position.
That, too, never happened.
Those who stuck it out to the bitter end — there weren’t many — were rewarded with Dellin Betances’s best work of the season, a so-called Immaculate Inning in which he struck out the side – Jim Adduci, Justin Upton and Miguel Cabrera — on nine pitches in the eighth.
But their wait for a Yankees run was in vain, and the entire affair, which ended 7 hours 30 minutes after the scheduled start time, resulted in a 2-0 Yankees loss.
“We thought we would have enough time to get it in,” said Manager Joe Girardi, who did not complain about the officials’ decision to delay the start.
“I think they were trying to protect both sides from using a starter and blowing a starter after two or three innings,” Girardi said.
The game was reminiscent of one that began June 27, 2016, and ended in the wee hours of June 28, delayed for more than three and a half hours with the Yankees three outs away from a 6-5 win over the Rangers. Texas eventually prevailed, 9-6.
Wednesday’s loss completed a nine-game homestand that started with a five-game winning streak but ended with the Yankees losing three of four. The loss left them a game behind the Red Sox in the American League East. The Red Sox’ game against the Cleveland Indians was rained out.
Aside from a few light drizzles, the original patch of “impending weather” never really materialized, and after an 86-minute delay, Masahiro Tanaka threw his first pitch at 2:31 p.m. That was the same moment when he gave up his first hit, a single by Ian Kinsler. By 2:33, Tanaka had allowed his first run on a single by Upton.
The Tigers added an unearned run in the fourth inning when Yankees center fielder Jacoby Ellsbury misplayed a single by James McCann, allowing Mikie Mahtook, who had also singled, to score from first.
That was all the Detroit scoring as Tanaka (8-10), who had pitched horrifically in five day games this season, with a 14.81 E.R.A. and five losses, settled down to throw six innings of six-hit ball, striking out seven.
But the Yankees’ offense, mired in a slump, was held scoreless by Tigers’ starter Jordan Zimmermann, who came into the game with a 5.69 E.R.A.
The Yankees got Gary Sanchez to third base in the second but failed to score him when Todd Frazier flied out. The Yankees also failed to capitalize when Brett Gardner and Jacoby Ellsbury reached second and third with two out in the third inning, and Sanchez grounded out. A single by Aaron Judge and a double by Sanchez to start the sixth were wasted when Didi Gregorius popped out, Matt Holliday flied out and Chase Headley struck out.
The rains finally came at the end of the seventh, accompanied by high winds and loud booms of thunder. The downpour subsided after about 30 minutes but continued as a steady rain for another hour or so. The grounds crew removed the tarp at about 6:30 p.m., but it took another 90 minutes to get the field in playable condition for the final two innings.
By the time play was about to resume, it had become a beautiful night for baseball, with a sunset breaking through the clouds and casting a golden glow on the white frieze ringing the top of the Stadium. But when Betances threw the first pitch of the resumed game at 8:01 p.m. after a delay of more than three hours, all but a smattering of the announced crowd of 43,379 had left. There appeared to be fewer than 1,000 fans remaining in the stands.
They got to see Betances’s perfect eighth, and a tidy ninth in which he worked around a one-out walk. But the Yankees’ offense could only manage an infield single by Ellsbury leading off the eighth. He was stranded when Judge struck out — after getting ahead, 3-0, on reliever Bruce Rondon — Sanchez grounded out, and Gregorius struck out.
The Yankees went down 1-2-3 in the ninth and finished 0-for-9 with runners in scoring position. The entire soggy affair came to a merciful end at 8:35 p.m., under conditions similar to those in which the game had started — cloudy, with hardly a trace of rain.