On Friday at 8:20 a.m. on the dot, Kirsty Godso and Lauren Williams started to teach their new class, Pyro Girls, at Project by Equinox, a boutique fitness studio at 267 Mulberry Street in SoHo.
The class, a mix of strength work and high-interval training, was carefully created by the trainers, who are close friends. Participants, dressed in bright-colored leggings, cut-up T-shirts and the latest name-brand footwear, grunted through intervals of burpees with names like hot sauce, Bloody Mary, and jalapeño.
By the end of the 50-minute workout participants were drenched in sweat and keeled over. But rather than run straight to the locker rooms, they stayed behind to chat with the instructors. Some requested selfies. Others needed clarifications on moves. A large group headed to the adjacent lounge where they helped themselves to free cold brew, laced with nitrogen for an extra kick, and analyzed the workout.
Equinox, the luxury health club chain, opened the new space, Project by Equinox, in March to experiment with new kinds of exercise, equipment and teaching methods. Instructors get to invent new classes and practice them with willing participants before rolling some of them out to the wider world.
“It’s a think tank, or incubator, or lab, or start-up, or whatever you want to call it,” said Vanessa Martin, the studio director.
To that end, traditional Equinox clubs aren’t the ideal places to experiment, since members expect a constant, high-level experience.
“This is our Google Garage, our 20-percent time,” Chloe Heckman, the vice president of business development at Equinox, said.
There are eight to 10 instructors at any given time working in the studio. They must first audition, and prove that they have an entrepreneurial spirit and the potential to build a brand. Once accepted, they get whatever equipment they want — one requested a pull-up bar big enough for a group; another, resistance bands with a specific type of clutch. Instructors can play around with a lighting system that has 110,000 different settings, or a video camera that provides short clips of their workouts for social media.
Every afternoon, the space is reserved for instructors to collaborate and experiment. “Once I was asked to hang from a pull-up bar with a resistance band on my ankle” for a “huge core engagement” exercise, said Ms. Martin.
Some fitness experts are dubious, however. Jason Kelly, the author of “Sweat Equity: Inside the New Economy of Mind and Body,” agreed that there is a desire for innovation. “The appetite for the next fitness thing is robust, especially with the 20- or 30-something set,” he said.
Ms. Godso and Ms. Williams used to have brunch and talk about the class they wanted to teach together. “This was the first time we had a space to do it,” said Ms. Godso.
