If Mr. Roth were not such a Warholian, he would hardly have spent the last 10 years inside the dead artist’s head. On Sept. 7 at the American Repertory Theater at Harvard, Mr. Roth unveils “WARHOLCAPOTE,” a two-man show a decade in the writing. Its words were culled from 80 hours of taped conversation between Warhol and the writer Truman Capote, buddies late in life.
“Truman Capote,” a 1984 piece by Andy Warhol.Credit...The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc.
For decades, the Andy Warhol Foundation has denied almost all access to the 3,000 cassettes that Warhol recorded of his daily talk: His gossip could sometimes veer into slander, bringing a risk of lawsuits. To get his hands on Warhol’s Capote tapes, Mr. Roth said he had to agree to indemnify the foundation, to give it full script approval and also a joint author’s share of the profits. And then he had to reach the same kind of arrangement with the Capote estate.
In fact, the first dozen tapes that Mr. Roth listened to left him doubting that there was gold to be mined there. Then one day, on a 1978 recording, Mr. Roth, 54, heard Warhol say this to Capote: “Let’s write a new play. Gee, Truman, can’t I just tape you?” Mr. Roth realized his own play would be all about letting us watch Warhol and Capote collaborate on a first, live draft of theirs.
Truman Capote, left, and Andy Warhol in 1977.Credit...The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc.
Opposite him onstage (Michael Mayer is directing) will be a Warhol played by Stephen Spinella, a two-time Tony winner for “Angels in America.” As Mr. Jordan told his bathroom story — hamming it up, Capote-style — the lanky Mr. Spinella listened in silent, Warhol-ish observation.
He said he didn’t have such a personal connection to his character, partly because of his admiration for him: “I’m playing somebody who has a way of seeing the world that is so much more interesting and revelatory than the way I see the world.” His challenge, said Mr. Spinella, would be to reveal a “real” Warhol inside a creator so controlled and self-conscious that he was always playing some kind of part.
Mr. Roth’s own crush on Warhol blossomed when he first saw the artist assuming a role. In 1985 Warhol appeared, as some version of himself, on “The Love Boat,” a favorite TV program of Mr. Roth’s throughout his youth in New Jersey. “I related to him — an outsider, a geek,” he explained.
Capote held a similar place in Mr. Roth’s heart. The writer’s star turn in the movie “Murder by Death,” a 1976 comedy, got Mr. Roth going back to the theater 15 times, he said, braving the neighborhood bullies each time he went. Mr. Roth already sensed he was gay — so, it seemed, did those bullies — and Warhol and Capote showed him that this didn’t have to limit his options.
The result was a vast hit, and Mr. Roth (then known as Robert Jess Roth) spent the next several decades staging the show around the world. That reliable, profitable gig eventually gave him the luxury of spending almost every non-“Beauty” minute digging into the Warhol tapes.
Early on, he discovered that the recordings might work as the bones of his play, “but it needed a bit more meat on it.” He imported a fresh supply of Capotean eloquence from published interviews; he mined new, more extended Warholisms out of the artist’s books, some of whose words come from the pens of ghostwriters.
Mr. Roth’s years at Disney had taught him that a show needed drama and emotion to speak to an audience, so he arranged his material to supply both.
To channel Warhol’s true notion of a tape-recorded play, “WARHOLCAPOTE” will need to baffle its viewers as well as please them. If it appears with a full quotient of Mr. Roth’s “drama and emotion,” it may attract the Broadway audience he is hoping for after the A.R.T. run. But also the ire of two colorful critics looking down from on high.
An undated photograph taken by Warhol titled “Truman Capote at Home, New York.”Credit...The Andy Warhol Foundation for the Visual Arts, Inc.
On that first day of the rehearsal, however, Mr. Mayer was already feeling an urge to nudge Mr. Roth’s script away from naturalism and toward something more “abstract,” as he put it, using one of Warhol’s favorite words. It was almost as if the artist had put it in his mouth.