Education Secretary Betsy DeVos on Tuesday scrapped a plan to overhaul the government’s system for collecting payments on $1.3 trillion in federal loans, canceling a contract procurement that would have handed management of nearly all aspects of the system over to a single vendor.
“By starting afresh and pursuing a truly modern loan servicing environment, we have a chance to turn what was a good plan into a great one,” Ms. DeVos said.
Most students who borrow for college use loans from the federal government to finance their studies. The Education Department outsources the work of servicing those loans — sending monthly bills, collecting payments and dealing with borrowers’ questions — to nine outside contractors. Their contracts expire in 2019.
Consumer advocates have complained that the system is overly complex and rife with poor customer service. Under President Barack Obama, the Education Department announced last year that it would replace that patchwork with a new, single web portal through which all borrowers would obtain information on their loans.
Ms. DeVos said in May that the department would stick with that approach, but with one major change: It wanted a single company to both build the new system and have the option of servicing all of the loans itself. Putting the entire project in one vendor’s hands would be “more effective and efficient,” she said at the time.
But the department’s winner-take-all plan prompted a broad outcry from consumer advocates, lawmakers, and even the industry itself, which is accustomed to splitting up the government’s lucrative contracts for student loan collection among a number of entrenched vendors.
A bipartisan group of senators introduced legislation on Monday to block the Education Department from moving all federal student loans to a single company.
Roy Blunt, a Missouri Republican, said that legislative action was needed to “prevent any one student loan servicer from becoming so large it poses a risk to taxpayers.” He was joined by another Republican, James Lankford of Oklahoma, and two Democrats, Jeanne Shaheen of New Hampshire and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts.
After canceling the contract solicitation, Ms. DeVos said that her department would still have a new system in place by 2019, when the existing servicing contracts expire, but she offered few specifics. A detailed plan, she said, will be developed under A. Wayne Johnson, the new leader of the agency’s Federal Student Aid office.
Mr. Johnson was appointed last month after the abrupt resignation of his predecessor, James Runcie, who was scheduled to stay through 2020. Mr. Runcie cut his term short after clashing with the Trump administration and Ms. DeVos.
Mr. Johnson, who now oversees the federal loans held by 42 million borrowers, was until recently the chief executive of a company that makes private student loans.
Four vendors, all among the department’s current servicers, had remained in the running for the now-canceled contract: Navient, the Pennsylvania Higher Education Assistance Agency (known as P.H.E.A.A.), and Nelnet and Great Lakes Educational Loan Services (which submitted a joint bid).
Keith New, a spokesman for P.H.E.A.A., said that the company supported “any changes to the process that results in better services to borrowers, students and families.” A Navient spokeswoman said that the company was looking forward to participating in the new process.
Any new system that the Education Department devises would affect millions of people. Loan servicers have tremendous power to guide borrowers through an often bewildering thicket of federal loan repayment options. Some plans stretch payment periods out as long as 30 years, and others help qualifying students get a portion of their debt forgiven.
The government’s consumer bureau has repeatedly criticized the Education Department’s current servicers for not doing more to help borrowers make their payment schedules more manageable.