WINFIELD, Kan. — If you watched the drama in Washington last month, you may have come away with the impression that the American health care system is a hopeless mess.
But perhaps the most interesting and potentially groundbreaking company created in connection with the Affordable Care Act is Aledade, a start-up founded in 2014 by Farzad Mostashari, a doctor and technologist who was the national coordinator for health information technology at the Department of Health and Human Services in the Obama administration.
Aledade, which has raised about $75 million from investors, has an agenda so ambitious it sounds all but impossible: Dr. Mostashari wants to reduce the cost of health care while improving how patients are treated. He also wants to save the independent primary care doctor, whose practices have been battered by the perverse incentives of the American health care system.
And here is the most interesting part: His plan is working.
A few weeks ago, I visited two primary care practices in southeast Kansas that have worked with Aledade for more than a year. Their operations had been thoroughly remade by the company. Thanks to Aledade, the practices’ finances had improved and their patients were healthier. On every significant measure of health care costs, the Aledade method appeared to have reduced wasteful spending.
Of course, such promises are not new at the intersection of health and technology. Many companies have made big bets and blown up — among them Theranos, the lab testing start-up, which turned out to have been more puffery than product. Aledade faces its own share of hurdles, including whether its investors can ride out a long and costly expansion before it starts to realize any big paydays.
Still, its plan — which mainly involves using software to achieve its goals — looks promising.
The American health care system is a fragmented archipelago, with patients moving through doctors’ offices and hospitals that are often disconnected from one another. As a result, many primary care physicians — who often see themselves as a kind of quarterback who calls the shots on a patient’s care — have no easy way to monitor a patient’s meandering path through the health care system.
Aledade’s software addresses that by collecting patient data from a variety of sources, creating a helicopter view. Doctors can see which specialists a patient has visited, which tests have been ordered, and, crucially, how much the overall care might be costing the health care system.
More important, the software uses the data to assemble a battery of daily checklists for physicians’ practices. These are a set of easy steps for the practice to take — call this patient, order this vaccine — to keep on top of patients’ care, and, in time, to reduce its cost.
For example, say you’re a doctor at a small practice in rural Kansas and one of your patients, a 67-year-old man with heart disease, has just gone to the emergency room.
It is not just emergency room visits. Aledade tells doctors which of their patients is eligible for preventive care like vaccines or an “annual wellness visit.” The doctors said that during such visits they have discovered several conditions that would have ballooned into much bigger problems without treatment. The software lets doctors know when their patients have been discharged from the hospital, allowing them to schedule “transitional care management” visits.
Such visits are a gimme for the health care system — they have been proved to reduce hospital readmissions (which are extremely costly), and patients say they find them valuable in navigating the health care system. And because these visits are so effective at lowering overall health care costs, Medicare pays doctors a higher rate to provide such care — meaning that primary care doctors can make money by following Aledade’s alerts.
Yet even though Aledade thinks of itself as a technology company, its doctors said its software is the least interesting thing it does. Independent primary care doctors tend to be cautious about technology, especially if it seeks to thoroughly alter how they work. So the real battle Aledade faces is to integrate technology into doctors’ practices — and to do so in an nonintrusive and pleasing way. The software’s instructions must also prove financially rewarding for clinics, while still somehow saving money for the overall health care system.
To do all this, Aledade — which now operates in 15 states and has relationships with more than 1,200 doctors — has had to become more than a software company. It has hired a battalion of field coordinators who visit practices and offer in-depth training and advice.
For Aledade, the upshot is that it will only make a lot of money if it actually succeeds in reducing health care costs.
In addition to Medicare, Aledade has begun signing up several commercial health insurance companies under similar cost-savings plans. But given that the company gets paid only when it cuts health care costs (while improving health outcomes), Aledade and its investors are making a gamble.
In its first year of operation, for instance, Aledade managed to cut many costly procedures, yet its savings did not meet Medicare’s benchmark — meaning it realized virtually no revenue from the savings program.
The results for its second year are due in October. This time, because Aledade said its savings grow over time, the company is likely to begin making money. “We’re very confident in our model,” Dr. Mostashari said.