Updated, Oct. 11: You can find all our latest Country of the Week quizzes on this page.
Can your students find North Korea on a map? South Africa? Venezuela? Greece?
As the image above shows, The Times reports from all over the globe. We have journalists in more than 30 international news bureaus worldwide, and every day we publish news, feature stories, videos, slide shows and more from dozens of countries around the world.
Our new “Country of the Week” feature celebrates this abundance to help build students’ geography skills. A weekly interactive quiz will first introduce students to a country via a recent video or photograph, then ask them to find that place on a map. Next, the quiz will focus on the demographics and culture of the country. Finally, we’ll include links to recent reporting from that place in case they, or you, would like to go further.
While we’ll certainly be choosing parts of the world that are making front-page headlines, we’ll also select interesting places they may simply enjoy learning about via Times visual journalism — as with this 360-degree view of riding the teleférico high above La Paz, Bolivia.
We’ve long considered producing some kind of geography-focused activity for students, but a recent Upshot piece gave our idea more urgency. The article reported on an experiment in which researchers asked Americans to locate North Korea on a map. Just 36 percent got it right. As a follow-up question, respondents were asked which policies the United States should pursue regarding North Korea. The results?
Respondents who could correctly identify North Korea tended to view diplomatic and nonmilitary strategies more favorably than those who could not. They also viewed direct military engagement — in particular, sending ground troops — much less favorably than those who failed to locate North Korea.
Our first “Country of the Week” will publish on Monday, Sept. 18, and you can look for new quizzes most Mondays during the school year.
We’d love to hear what you think about this new feature: Please share your thoughts in the comments section.