Amid heated discussions of the power of language to affect international diplomacy, our thoughts naturally turn to the unacknowledged legislators of the world — poets. A new biography of John Ashbery delves into the early years of this nonagenarian American treasure, while Allen Ginsberg’s collected lectures offer a panoramic view onto the Beats. Ready to meet some new voices on the poetry scene? Try collections by Dylan Krieger, Erika Sánchez, Layli Long Soldier and Karyna McGlynn, with Louise Glück’s essays on contemporary American poetry as a guide.
THE SONGS WE KNOW BEST: John Ashbery’s Early Life, by Karin Roffman. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $30.) Ashbery has been averse to autobiographical revelation in his poetry. But this first full-fledged biography of the poet, who has just turned 90, is full of rich and fascinating detail. It focuses on his rarely explored youth, exploring the question of how a shy boy overcame a hostile culture to become one of the great poets of his age.
THE BEST MINDS OF MY GENERATION: A Literary History of the Beats, by Allen Ginsberg. Edited by Bill Morgan. (Grove, $27.) Ginsberg referred to himself as a “visiting gorilla” the first time he taught, filling in at San Francisco State University. He went on to teach five courses on the Beat Generation between 1977 and 1994. In a marvelous feat of editing and reorganization, Morgan, Ginsberg’s longtime bibliographer and friend, has condensed the 100 or so lectures Ginsberg gave into a compact and spellbinding text — a truly authoritative view of the Beats by one of their own.
WHEREAS, by Layli Long Soldier. (Graywolf, paper, $16.) Long Soldier, a member of the Oglala Sioux tribe, troubles our consideration of the language we use to carry our personal and national narratives in this moving and ambitious debut collection. The poem at its heart, “38,” recounts the hanging of 38 Dakota men, ordered by Lincoln days before he signed the Emancipation Proclamation.
WHY POETRY, by Matthew Zapruder. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $24.99.) For people who say they just don’t know how to read poetry, Zapruder explores, clearly and simply, why we read poetry and what it does. Subtle readings of a wide range of poets help him examine the workings of the poetry “machine,” the poem itself, and describe its effect on the mind.
FAST, by Jorie Graham. (Ecco/HarperCollins, $25.99.) Graham created these poems against a backdrop of personal and political trauma — her parents are dying, she is undergoing cancer treatment, the nation is mired in war and ecological crisis. The result is an autopsy of self and nation in the face of overwhelming loss that reveals how interconnected we all are.
GIVING GODHEAD, by Dylan Krieger. (Delete, paper, $17.99.) Seamlessly mixing the religious with the obscene, determined to create a new form of the grotesque that marries autobiography to personal and national trauma, Krieger’s book is inventive and powerful. “A bomb with an angel behind it” is how our reviewer described this explosive collection.
LESSONS ON EXPULSION: Poems, by Erika Sánchez. (Graywolf, paper, $16.) This lush and formidable debut tackles difficult subjects, including Sánchez’s sense of dislocation as the daughter of undocumented Mexican immigrants. Depictions of misery are placed vibrantly alongside depictions of beauty and promise.
AMERICAN ORIGINALITY: Essays on Poetry, by Louise Glück. (Farrar, Straus & Giroux, $24.) This slim volume of essays, the author’s second, addresses the practice of poetry in America with mesmerizing authority. In the guise of a critic, Glück shows herself to be a kind of dark contemporary conscience, but she is also darkly funny about poetry’s temptation toward grandiosity.
HOTHOUSE, by Karyna McGlynn. (Sarabande, paper, $14.95.) Approaching femininity in a campy way, skewering gender stereotypes, this glittery, screwball second collection offers entertaining and upsetting poems, often in the voice of a femme fatale.