Hurricane Harvey may inflict as much as $30 billion in damages on homeowners, according to preliminary estimates. But only 40 percent of that total may be covered by insurance — and of that, the federal government will bear the biggest liability.
Private homeowners’ policies generally cover wind damage and, in certain cases, water damage from storm surges. But for almost half a century, all other homeowners’ flood coverage has been underwritten by the National Flood Insurance Program, a federal program that itself faces financial uncertainty.
Flooding has dealt the hurricane’s biggest blow. And in areas where it is prudent — or even obligatory — to buy it, having flood coverage is the exception rather than the norm.
Homeowners in areas designated as 100-year flood zones are required to hold policies from the federal program. But in practice, the requirement is difficult to enforce and most people — including in eastern Texas — fail to buy coverage or let their policies lapse by not keeping up on the premiums.
Mr. Watson, who lives in what he believes to be a flood-prone area of South Carolina, said only he and a couple of his neighbors had flood coverage, even though the premiums are far lower than the cost of potential claims.
The Federal Emergency Management Agency issues maps showing 100-year floodplains, and bases flood insurance rates on those. The maps provide good data on where storm surges may hit, or rivers may overflow their banks, said Carolyn Kousky, director of policy research at the Wharton School’s Risk Management and Decision Processes Center.
“But what they don’t handle well is when a downpour overwhelms a local storm-water drainage system,” she said. That is what is now happening in the Houston area, “on a scale that’s never been seen before,” she said.
That means many homeowners with water now up to their knees, or higher, were never required to buy flood insurance, because their property was not listed as being on a 100-year floodplain.
Harris County, which includes Houston, started using new floodplain maps from FEMA in January. The maps added about 8,000 parcels to the agency’s Special Flood Hazard Areas, meaning those properties have a better than a one-in-four chance of flooding at some point during a 30-year mortgage.
Local authorities in Houston worked with FEMA to get the word out about the need for flood insurance, but it was a hard sell. And now that there is a flood, it is too late to buy it.
People without coverage will have to apply for grants or low-cost loans from other branches of the federal government, said Loretta Worters, a spokeswoman for the Insurance Information Institute. That means delays in receiving funds, if such requests are even approved.
A FEMA spokeswoman said the agency would have National Flood Insurance Program claims statistics for Harvey later this week.
The 49-year-old program is now run by FEMA. Its coverage has caps: $250,000 for a house and $100,000 for its contents, and $500,000 apiece for a business building and its contents. Larger companies can still buy flood coverage through commercial insurers.
And even though the insurance is capped, the flood program’s finances have been shaky since 2005, when it lacked the resources to pay for the record-setting claims of Hurricane Katrina, and had to borrow $17 billion from the United States Treasury.
The program has not been able to pay back that debt — in fact, it has had to borrow even more, just to pay the interest on its existing debt, and to pay additional storm claims. It now owes the Treasury $24.6 billion.
Hurricane Harvey will almost certainly lead to further borrowing — but the program has only $5.8 billion left in its existing line of credit with the Treasury.
The program runs on five-year authorizations by Congress, the latest of which will expire on Sept. 30. If Congress does not reauthorize the program, its ability to borrow from the Treasury will be drastically reduced.
Congress has held hearings on the matter and is considering several possible remedies, including simply extending the program temporarily. Lawmakers have occasionally granted such extensions in the past.
“I think all stakeholders are in agreement that the worst thing there could be is a lapse of the program,” Ms. Kousky said. FEMA normally works with mortgage lenders to enforce its flood-insurance requirement, but when the program’s authorization lapses, home sales cannot close.
“It just creates havoc in the housing market,” she said.
This year, there is an added complication: The flood insurance program’s expiration roughly coincides with the possibility that the Treasury itself will run up against its legal debt ceiling, something that could happen in the first two weeks of October. Federal borrowing has itself become contentious, with some debt-averse members of Congress threatening to fight any increase in the government’s borrowing limit.
