In a new novel called “Imagining Diana,” readers find Princess Diana having lunch in Midtown Manhattan at Michael’s, nodding hello to Barbara Walters on her way in, dressed in an Oscar de la Renta suit, sitting at Table 1, ordering the gravlax.
Her date is Lois Shadley: a loudmouthed, four-Splendas-in-her-iced-tea literary agent who is pushing Diana to write a memoir, one that wouldn’t just be about the do-gooder stuff. One that would dish about the aftermath of the accident and whether it was true that her post-divorce friendship with Prince Charles was driving Camilla batty with jealousy. “I mean what I think would feel fresh — really come alive — is that this should begin on that terrible night in Paris,” the agent yapped.
The novel imagines that Diana survived the car accident in Paris that killed her on Aug. 31, 1997, and then tells of the princess’s efforts to rebuild her life. “Since her death, she has become even more fascinating,” said Ms. Clehane, earlier this week, sitting at Table 1 at Michael’s (from which she reports a frequent column called “Lunch” in Adweek), over a plate of chicken paillard and kale.
But back to our fairy tale: Diana, by then the stateside “People’s Princess,” travels abroad often for the Princess Diana Foundation, and to London often to see her sons. She presents the best documentary award at the Academy Awards to a film about land mines in Cambodia and Laos, and harmlessly flirts with a star-struck movie star at the Vanity Fair after-party.
When in Los Angeles, she stays at the Hotel Bel-Air. But mostly she lives with Teddy Forstmann at his Fifth Avenue apartment and Southampton estate. She has a diamond engagement ring (a tasteful nine carats), and the $100 million prenup is signed, sealed and delivered. Diana is ours, again, if only for 208 pages.
Diana was famous before the internet, famous before millions of iPhones began to capture every sneeze of every celebrity pushing her cart in a Whole Foods parking lot. To observe her, the public relied on paparazzi, magazines and newspapers of varying quality, and television. Biographers, including the longtime editor Tina Brown, have documented how Diana tried to shape all this coverage by making herself selectively available and self-revelatory.
Back in her day, that sometimes was called manipulating the press. Today it’s called branding.
In our so-called curated, fake news era, it is perhaps inevitable that fact and fiction would begin to mingle in books, movies and television. “The best of fiction has always tried to get at truth where journalism cannot,” said Curtis Sittenfeld, the author of the 2008 book “American Wife,” a novel that based the life of a fictional first lady on that of a real one, Laura Bush.
Ms. Sittenfeld is getting more practice at considering the conjoining of fact and fiction, ego and alter. Last year, Esquire commissioned her to write a short story from the voice and perspective of Hillary Clinton. In it, a fictional Mrs. Clinton reflects on her relationship with a fictional journalist who has covered her for years, at The San Francisco Chronicle, The Washington Post and finally The New York Times.
Once Ms. Sittenfeld got Hillary in her head, she couldn’t easily dispense with her. Now she is at work on a novel that will portray the life of Hillary Rodham after she decides to reject Bill Clinton’s final proposal of marriage.
Some exercises in reconsidering history are not so lighthearted. Last month, HBO announced that David Benioff and D. B. Weiss, the creators of “Game of Thrones,” would collaborate on a new project, “Confederate”: a modern-day drama based on a premise that slavery persists in the South after its successful secession from the Union during the Civil War.
The reaction was scathing. “This show is the brainchild of two white men who oversee a show that has few people of color to speak of and where sexual violence is often gratuitous and treated as no big deal. I shudder to imagine the enslaved black body in their creative hands,” Roxane Gay wrote in The New York Times.
Alternate reality, though gaining prevalence today, is hardly new. The 2015 Amazon series “The Man in the High Castle,” based on a 1960s book, focuses on an America that has been divided into Greater Nazi Reich and the Japanese Pacific States after the Allies lose World War II. In the 2004 novel “The Plot Against America,” which The New Yorker called “counterfactual,” Philip Roth wrote of an America in which Charles Lindbergh, the Nazi sympathizer, is elected president in 1940.
The genre provides writers with a valuable literary device to contemplate our culture, Monica Ali, a novelist, said in an email. Ms. Ali is the author of “Untold Story,” a 2011 book in which a princess, based on Diana, escapes her life in order to find ordinary pleasures in American suburban life.
With the new book, Ms. Clehane wanted to show that Diana would have found happiness and overcome her insecurities. “I believe the love she felt for her sons would have pulled her back from whatever precipice she felt she was on,” she said as her eyes welled with tears.
Ms. Clehane won’t be denied her happy ending for Diana, even if Diana was.