WASHINGTON — When a former Goldman Sachs executive was found to have mishandled confidential information in connection with an embarrassing leak at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the decision did not come in a typical court of law.
Instead, the preliminary finding was issued by an administrative law judge in a closely held proceeding at the Federal Reserve — a rare venue for disputes.
And the decision was reached before a hearing scheduled for it was held. While lawyers for the two sides argued their positions in briefs, there was no public docket online to independently track them.
The case of Joseph Jiampietro, previously a managing director at Goldman, sheds light on the inner workings of an in-house court system, whose use by a fellow financial regulator — the Securities and Exchange Commission — has come under fire from critics who say internal courts tip the scales against defendants.
Mr. Jiampietro’s case is one of just a small number of Fed actions to come before an administrative law judge in recent years.
Just six matters, including this one, have been contested over the last five years, out of more than 400 enforcement actions, according to the central bank. All the cases involve individuals facing a lifetime ban from banking. Three of the cases have concluded with bankers being barred, either through a settlement or in a decision by the Fed.
While financial institutions and individual bankers are far more likely to settle with their regulators, Mr. Jiampietro did fight back and appears poised to lose, in a proceeding that took place out of the public eye.
In a June 5 order, the administrative law judge overseeing the case, Christopher B. McNeil, said that he expected to issue a recommended decision in favor of the Fed on all three claims brought by the agency’s lawyers: that Mr. Jiampietro engaged in unsafe or unsound banking practices, violated requirements surrounding the use of confidential information, and breached his fiduciary duty to Goldman. He added that he expected to recommend that Mr. Jiampietro be banned from the industry.
A court seal on that order was lifted last month.
Adam Ford, Mr. Jiampietro’s lawyer and a partner at the law firm Ford O’Brien, objected to the judge’s decision and said he had fundamental concerns about how the proceeding was conducted.
The lawyer has filed a motion asking the Federal Reserve board of governors to direct the administrative law judge to file his recommended decision and to throw out a subsequent order from July 13 that would require months of additional discovery in the case with regards to setting a penalty amount for the Goldman executive. The Fed had sought a fine of $337,500.
Mr. Ford also raised numerous concerns with the tribunal process in his motion, saying that deposition subpoenas for two central witnesses had been quashed and that the Fed’s lawyers had withheld materials beneficial to Mr. Jiampietro’s case. He argued that the judge’s preliminary order relied on disputed facts in the case and made findings of credibility, which are typically not permitted in the type of order issued.
“The administrative process Joe has endured is an affront to our justice system, and was devoid of the due process protections we have come to expect our government to provide all Americans,” Mr. Ford said in a statement.
The central bank’s lawyers defended the administrative process. The judge “was well within his authority to issue the June 5 and July 13 orders,” according to their reply brief.
Mr. Jiampietro “had a full and fair opportunity for discovery” and the Fed’s lawyers “acted in good faith in every aspect of this investigation,” the brief said.
Regulators like the Fed have, in recent years, put a greater emphasis on punishing individual bankers for wrongdoing. The agency has already banned four bankers from the industry this year. It barred another seven in each of the previous two years, up from three in 2014 and zero in 2013.
The charges are tied to a broader investigation into the actions of a junior banker under Mr. Jiampietro, who was accused of obtaining confidential documents from the New York Fed, where he had previously worked.
An administrative proceeding tends to be more streamlined than a full-blown trial, potentially saving both sides time and resources. But critics argue that the structure of the internal courts can influence at least the perception of fairness. While there are guidelines in place that in-house judges must follow, they are typically not bound by the same standards as a federal court, which can limit opportunities for those involved to defend themselves.
“Administrative law judges have to follow procedural rules and rules of practice before the agency — and violations of those rules are problematic,” because they could provide grounds for an agency decision to be overturned in federal court, said Urska Velikonja, a law professor at Georgetown University, who has studied administrative proceedings at the S.E.C.
Andrew Sandler, chairman and executive partner of the law firm Buckley Sandler, who has handled a number of administrative proceedings at virtually all of the banking agencies, noted that the administrative process has benefits over trying to hash out actions with regulators directly.
Goldman fired Mr. Jiampietro in 2014 after it discovered that the employee he helped oversee had obtained supervisory materials from a former colleague inside the New York Fed. The documents included details about at least one of Goldman’s banking clients.
The leak — which was first reported by The New York Times — was embarrassing for both the central bank and Goldman as it raised fresh concerns about the dangers of the so-called revolving door between Wall Street and government.
The investment bank paid a total of $86.3 million in penalties to the Fed and New York State authorities in response to the episode. The junior Goldman banker, Rohit Bansal, whom Mr. Jiampietro helped oversee, and Jason Gross, the New York Fed employee who passed on the information, were both fired. Both Mr. Bansal and Mr. Gross pleaded guilty to stealing government property and have been barred from the industry.
Mr. Jiampietro told investigators that he never read the documents and did not know that they were illegally obtained. He has not faced any charges or penalties in connection with the investigations by the United States attorney’s office in Manhattan, the New York State Department of Financial Services or the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority.
But the Fed charged last August that Mr. Jiampietro had directed Mr. Bansal to get the information to help his advisory business. It also accused him of mishandling sensitive materials dating to 2012.
Yet the judge’s order does not rule on accusations that Mr. Jiampietro sought out or intentionally misused any confidential documents. It finds instead that Mr. Jiampietro failed to determine the nature of sensitive materials provided to him and also distributed them.
The Fed’s lawyers set aside Mr. Bansal’s statements and testimony, which the defense had contested, when they asked the court to decide the case before a trial-like hearing, a process known as a summary disposition. They relied on Mr. Jiampietro’s “own admissions,” materials he “indisputably sent or received” and “undisputed expert reports” in line with rules for seeking an expedited decision, the lawyers argued in their reply brief.
A Fed spokesman declined to comment on Mr. Jiampietro’s case or its use of administrative proceedings.
A representative for the Office of Financial Institution Adjudication, the executive body that provides administrative law judges to the Fed, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the National Credit Union Administration, also declined to comment. Mr. McNeil is one of two judges in that office.
Mr. Jiampietro will be able to renew the matter before a federal appeals court if the Fed affirms a recommended decision from the judge. But for the time being, the case continues to play out at the central bank’s internal court.