Architecturally, Rob Collins said, the best golf holes are those in which success and failure reside in close quarters.
Collins has an intimate understanding of success and failure. If you head a half-hour west of Chattanooga, Tenn., exit Interstate 24 onto a quiet country road, turn down a dirt driveway, pull into a grass parking lot and see the locker room (a single blue port-a-potty) and the clubhouse (a 20-foot-by-10-foot aluminum shed), you may not immediately realize which category Sweetens Cove Golf Club comes under.
Rob Collins, 42, is 6 feet 6 inches of unyielding self-assurance. He is the architect of Sweetens Cove and its owner-operator. He also has served as its head of construction, head pro, general manager and entire maintenance crew. Recently, he has acquired a newer, unlikelier title: golf cult hero.
This spring, Golfweek listed Sweetens Cove at No. 59 in its top 100 modern golf courses, a ranking of American courses built since 1960. It is one of only two nine-hole courses included on the list, and it is ranked third among daily-fee public courses. Sweetens Cove is ahead of numerous sites that have hosted PGA Tour events and major championships, including Hazeltine and Valhalla. Quail Hollow Club, the site of the 2017 P.G.A. Championship, which concluded on Sunday, was just behind Sweetens Cove at No. 60.
Opened in 2014, Sweetens Cove is Collins’s answer to golf’s postrecession challenges of declining participation and stagnant course construction.
Between 1990 and 2006, more than 4,500 golf courses were opened in the United States. It was a bubble fueled by the rise of Tiger Woods and a prerecession financial optimism. More people were buying homes than could afford them, and many new housing developments that sprung up featured golf courses.
When the housing market crashed in 2008, golf went with it. Golf course residential spending plummeted and the number of new golf course construction projects fell. Images of abandoned, half-built golf course developments — where unsold condos overlooked overgrown courses — were reminders of miscalculated affluence.
Collins had an entry-level job in golf course architecture in British Columbia at the time, working with Gary Player’s firm.
His job disappeared, so Collins took his wife and 4-year-old daughter and moved in with his mother in Chattanooga. He was a landscape architect who had only ever wanted to do one thing: build golf courses. What could he do now?
But Collins sensed a glimmer of opportunity in the industry’s rubble and fell back on a conversation he had had with the builder Tad King years earlier at a restaurant in Naples, Fla.
Now, postcrash, Collins called King, wondering: What if golf’s rapid decline was not just the result of the recession? What if the courses themselves were to blame?
“People had been building golf courses completely wrong for years,” Collins said.
Before the crash, he said, courses were either so long and so hard that golfers needed to be professionals to have any fun, or “limp, bland, paint by numbers” — built as decoration for a housing development. And they were too expensive to build and maintain, a cost ultimately borne by customers.
By 2010, King and Collins had started their own design firm, but they had no prospective clients.
Then a project fell into their lap: the redesign of a featureless, insolvent parkland course in South Pittsburg, Tenn., population 3,000. It had been purchased as the side project of a local concrete conglomerate.
Collins worked with a skeleton crew for long hours and low pay on an accelerated timeline. Other architects and prospective owners circled like vultures, ready to buy up the property. In sheer desperation, Collins mortgaged everything and took over the lease himself.
The course cost about $1 million to build, while a top design firm would have charged $8 million to $10 million for such a project, Collins said.
Four years after getting the job, with Sweetens Cove finally set to open in October 2014, Collins officially ran dry. There was no money to keep the maintenance staff on, never mind pave a parking lot, build a clubhouse or do any marketing for the course’s debut.
But maybe the golf course was enough.
Broad, undulating fairways stretch out across the property, some of them 100 yards wide, the rolling landscape interrupted only by a set of vast waste areas and a handful of wild, chasmic bunkers that would be easier to escape with a shovel and a ladder.
Andy Johnson, the founder of The Fried Egg, a website that focuses on golf course architecture, wrote a rave review and has urged friends to make the trip.
A budget-restricted or schedule-conscious golfer can walk Sweetens Cove for only $20 or rent a cart for $10 more — and finish all nine holes in an hour and a half.
At first, nobody showed up. Collins ran the entire operation that first winter, from manning the rent-a-shed pro shop to raking the bunkers and cutting the grass. But as word spread to Nashville, Birmingham, Atlanta and beyond, more players started to fill the tee sheet.
Collins persuaded some industry experts to come to town, and they were impressed.
John Allen, 49, lives in Huntsville, Ala., a 75-minute drive from Sweetens Cove. He belongs to a golf club near his house, but instead makes the drive to South Pittsburg at least once a week. He considers himself a leader of what he refers to as the Sweetens Cove illuminati.
Golfers are not the only converts. Collins said Arnold Palmer’s design firm had called recently to enlist his help on a streamlined construction model.
Can courses like Sweetens Cove help solve the waning interest in golf?
