In the pilot of CW’s “Valor,” Capt. Leland Gallo (Matt Barr) tells the helicopter pilot Nora Madani (Christina Ochoa) why secretive special-operations units, like the one they belong to, have become so central to American fighting.
“People don’t want boots on the ground, so this is what war is now,” he says.
As in life, as on TV. This fall, “Valor” and two other new network dramas about precisely the same sort of military unit are seeking to enlist the viewing public. CBS’s “SEAL Team” tells fictional stories of the Navy SEAL Team Six — just as “Six,” on History, did earlier this year. NBC’s “The Brave” involves a different special-forces outfit, but it’s the same in all but name.
The military may be having a TV moment, but as Captain Gallo says in “Valor,” these shows assume that the public doesn’t want a deep engagement. Instead, they present combat as a quick-hit operation. War may be hell, but this fall it’s just another action-drama genre.
There’s nothing specifically Trumpian about the shows’ premises or tones. While Muslim terrorists are prominent, for instance, the shows conspicuously avoid any West-vs.-the-world clash-of-civilizations framing. They’re cast multiculturally and multiracially; “The Brave,” like “Six,” includes Muslim soldiers in its special-operations unit.
These series, likewise, have two hands: one to pull the trigger, one to pull back on the jingoism. Rather than a political statement, they seem like an acknowledgment that war has been a constant of American life for a generation.
Indeed, the endlessness of America’s post-9/11 engagements has been a recurring thread in prime time. “24: Legacy” focused on a war veteran pursuing, and being pursued by, enemies seeking revenge for a terrorist’s assassination. FX’s “Over There” and HBO’s “Generation Kill” were set amid the ground war in Iraq, while “Homeland” has explored the drone war.
One simple dramatic explanation for this year’s trend may be that this type of combat — quick strikes by small units — is made for TV. There’s a small core of characters, high-explosive action and short, defined operations, which lend themselves to weekly episodes the same way police cases do.
Like other established genres, military shows have their clichés, and even within this small handful there’s a lot of repetition. “SEAL Team” isn’t just about the same unit as “Six” — it has the same framing device (a flashback to a mission that goes wrong) and similar subplots about the strain on soldiers’ family lives.
The plots of the “SEAL Team” and “The Brave” pilots are head-smackingly similar, down to small details. Both involve a blond, female nongovernmental-organization worker being abducted by Muslim extremists. In each, the unit has to decide between rescuing the hostage and targeting a terrorist leader.
The twist in “The Brave,” such as it is, is that the focus is divided between special forces on the ground and the intelligence officers back home (led by an officer played by Anne Heche) directing the mission by satellite link. The success of the show may depend on how compelling you find videochat sessions.
“Valor” stands out, if only for having a slightly different premise — it too starts out with a covert operation gone wrong, but that sets up an ongoing story line about a cover-up and conflicting loyalties. This being CW, the soldiers are also young, hot and quick to show off their battle scars, among other flesh.
There are about 1.3 million Americans on active duty, and their service is vast and varied. But you wouldn’t know it to watch these shows. Compare their emphasis on elite strike teams, for instance, with Fox’s 2014 “Enlisted,” a hilarious comedy about the foibles of life on a support base in Florida that saw the value in this less-glamorous form of service.
There’s also a world of stories to be done about military families, who have been represented only sporadically on TV. The “SEAL Team” pilot gives this cursory attention: Will Jason Hayes (David Boreanaz) make it home in time for his daughter’s music recital?
But one of TV’s best current takes on this cost of war is a program that takes place far from the battlefield: Netflix’s revival of “One Day at a Time,” which debuted in January.
Anyone looking for a sweeping view of service and its costs this fall might try a much different program, with a much different mission: Ken Burns and Lynn Novick’s wrenching 18-hour documentary, “The Vietnam War,” coming to PBS in September. It switches between a macro and micro view of the war to detail both the geopolitical decisions that mired the United States in Vietnam and the individual lives it changed, on both sides of the conflict.
Its ambition is much different, obviously, from escapist special-forces dramas. Those series have a commercial interest in selling their subject — like the old recruiting ads did — as not just a job but an adventure. “The Vietnam War” is a much broader story of how one decision after another turned a small commitment of advisers into a generation-defining catastrophe.
But the documentary is an ever-timely reminder of the consequences of buying into the Hollywood idea that war can be limited, surgical and over with in about an hour with commercials.