DENNING, N.Y. — For decades, hikers in the Catskills have gone swimming in a freshwater pool in Sundown Wild Forest, near the foot of Peekamoose Mountain. They called it the Blue Hole because of the crystalline quality of its water, and for many, a trip there was a cherished tradition.
Although it can be found on maps, most people learned about the pool through word of mouth. But that began to change several years ago as mentions surfaced on the internet.
The Blue Hole was described on websites like Roadtrippers.com and Tripadvisor.com. Images of its translucent water surrounded by rock ledges appeared on Instagram. It was extolled on lists of the country’s best swimming holes, like those compiled by Men’s Journal (which called it “a cool, refreshing haven”) and Travel + Leisure (a place for “rowdy camaraderie”).
Soon, the pool, in Ulster County, about 20 miles from Woodstock, was crowded with more visitors than ever. Many seemed unfamiliar with the conservation practices that had guided most of the backpackers and local residents who had visited over the years.
The effect of the influx has been profound. Over the last two or three years, cars have parked haphazardly on the shoulder of County Road 42, which runs past the pool, and revelers have hauled boomboxes, portable grills and coolers full of beer to its banks. The surrounding area has been strewn with garbage and, sometimes, human waste.
Many who swam for years in the Blue Hole or sought moments of quiet contemplation there have been dismayed, saying that the increased popularity of the spot has threatened to destroy precisely what made it precious.
State officials have responded by instituting measures to address what has become an increasingly common problem for conservation authorities across the country who aim to strike a balance between making parklands accessible and protecting them from degradation.
Basil Seggos, the commissioner of the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, said during a phone call last week that while the agency encouraged the use of public land, concern over the Blue Hole had grown, as the “postage stamp-sized area” recently began drawing up to 1,000 visitors a day.
On Saturday, rangers on Route 42 directed people to 11 parking areas spread over nearly four miles that can collectively accommodate about 100 vehicles. Those pulling over on the side of the road were told they could not remain.
Kelly R. Turturro, a regional director for the Conservation Department, said that enforcing the parking rules was one way to make sure visitors would not overwhelm the Blue Hole.
Recently, members of groups like the Catskill Conservation Corps and the Adirondack Mountain Club arranged for a volunteer cleanup day at the Blue Hole. And the Leave No Trace Center for Outdoor Ethics designated it this year as one of 16 spots that had been negatively affected by recreational use. Ben Lawhon, the education director for the center, which is based in Boulder, Colo., said the group wanted to provide visitors with a framework for how to minimize their impact on wilderness areas.
There was evidence that the efforts by government and conservation groups could be paying off, although state officials said compliance with rules fluctuated and the site required consistent monitoring. Some trash, including cigarette butts and plastic bags of garbage, could be seen at the Blue Hole on Saturday, but the area was mostly free of debris and there were no fires or blaring radios.
Some local residents at the Blue Hole that day said that, outreach and enforcement aside, there was no way to slow the crowds.
“Once social media got ahold of this, it really turned things around,” said Frank Santander, 23, a contractor from Denning.
Nearby was Kate Marin, who said she had traveled from Brooklyn with three friends. Ms. Marin, 23, a writer from Crown Heights, said she welcomed the instructions on how to minimize the effect on the environment.
