“You mean my land?” Ms. Wright asked, before kicking them out.
She said she also learned, for the first time, that a section of the proposed wall on the border with Mexico — and a pair of parallel roads on either side of it — would run through the butterfly center, a nonprofit organization dedicated to the conservation and study of wild butterflies.. The wall’s placement would cut off two-thirds of the center’s property, leaving a 70-acre no man’s land between the wall and the Rio Grande.
Although Congress has yet to provide the money for Mr. Trump’s wall, preparations for its construction are underway. Officials with Customs and Border Protection recently held a meeting in the valley at which they displayed a map of the wall’s proposed route.
A United States-Mexico treaty prohibits building a wall or levee in the Rio Grande floodplain, so the map shows the wall being built well north of the river. But that means it will slice through countless pieces of private property and bisect several major wildlife refuges. When asked about the map, officials emphasized that it was only a proposal, and that the wall’s construction was dependent upon the federal budget for 2018.
The threat to the area’s natural habitats like the birdlands and butterfly haven has prompted letters to members of Congress, lawsuits and protests — the most recent of which was Saturday in this remote South Texas city in the Rio Grande Valley.
The protesters began gathering before dawn at Our Lady of Guadalupe Catholic Church to demonstrate against President Trump’s proposed border wall.
Father Roy Snipes delivered a prayer in English and Spanish, then climbed into a station wagon — outfitted with a large figurine of the church’s namesake strapped to the roof — to lead the approximately 1,000 protesters in a four-mile march to the Rio Grande.
Saturday’s protest march ended at La Lomita Chapel, which was built in the 19th century on a rise overlooking the Rio Grande. Father Snipes explained that it was originally intended as a sign of friendship between America and Mexico. But if the border wall is completed, the chapel will be equally inaccessible to both countries.
