Neil Chayet, a judge’s son whose health law practice was less renowned than the minute-long summaries of court cases he delivered weekdays to a national radio audience for 41 years, died on Friday in Salem, Mass. He was 78.
His wife, Martha, said the cause was small cell cancer.
By the time he retired from radio in June, Mr. Chayet had distilled more than 10,000 cases into quick legal yarns that kept his “Looking at the Law” segments a staple on the Boston powerhouse station WBZ-AM and the stations to which it was syndicated nationally by CBS News Radio.
Mr. Chayet shied away from talking about cases that were widely known, leaning instead toward interesting and quirky ones that were untethered to a particular date. He found some cases himself, but he also relied on research by law students hired to assist him and friends in the legal community.
Mr. Chayet’s on-air formula was simple. When he introduced himself, he always stretched the ‘l’ in his given name. Then came a rapid summary of the case that was cogent, colloquial and friendly, like a disc jockey talking about a singer’s new release. And he almost always ended with wordplay or a pun (the worst of which his wife said she had the right to veto).
Neil Lewis Chayet (pronounced CHAY-et) was born in Boston on Jan. 17, 1939. His father, Ely, was a judge in Norfolk County, Mass., and his mother, the former Blanche Poretsky, was a homemaker. He graduated from Tufts University and Harvard Law School.
He was also one of the lawyers in a widely publicized state lawsuit filed on behalf of inmates at the Bridgewater State Hospital, which housed the criminally insane; the suit accused the filmmaker Frederick Wiseman of violating their privacy in his documentary “Titicut Follies” (1967). A decision by a Massachusetts judge largely banned the film from being shown nationally, except for educational purposes, for many years.
Mr. Chayet’s ease at talking to the media brought him to the attention of the Boston radio station WEEI, which hired him in to start the “Looking at the Law” segments. In 1991 he moved to WBZ, where he also hosted a Sunday talk show for many years.
Devoted as Mr. Chayet was to “Looking at the Law,” it was always a sidelight; through all the years he remained a well-connected lawyer, lobbyist and lecturer.
In addition to his wife, the former Martha Gruntmeir, he is survived by his sons, Michael and Ely; his daughter, Lisa Chayet Sahlberg; five grandchildren; and his sister, Jayne Olken. His marriage to the former Susan Mullen ended in divorce.
Mr. Chayet, who was active in the Massachusetts Republican Party and considered running for the Senate and governor, was long interested in creative ways to resolve conflicts. At Tufts’s experimental college, he recently taught a course in conflict resolution that examined legal cases, psychology and the study of brain function.
