We spoke to the chief executive of Garden and Gun and discussed how she transformed her workplace in historic Charleston, S.C. into a modern office imbued with southern charm.
Our offices are on the fringe of the city, in a burgeoning area of new businesses and restaurants in what’s known as the Cigar Factory. Constructed in 1881, the building was first used for manufacturing cotton, and then for cigars. Today it’s a mixed-use building. We have the second floor of the right wing. One of the best things about the location is the large parking area.
Many of my office furnishings are antiques, and some are contemporary patterns mixed with African textiles. I left the original exposed brick walls to add some warmth to the high-ceiling industrial look, and I layered Oriental rugs over woven sea grass to soften the weathered floors. The plantation shutters are a staple in Charleston homes. They’re painted the popular Charleston Green, and the Sheetrock walls and brick walls that have been plastered over are a lighter shade of the same color. There’s also a fully stocked bar.
One of my two partners and I started the magazine in 2007 and rented space here in 2015. The name comes from a Charleston bar popular in the 1970s and mid-80s. I wanted a title that would appeal to women and men equally. To me the words are metaphors. Garden is the land, the basis of everything in the magazine, from food and music to sporting culture. Gun is a nod to the sporting life. We’re mainly about bird hunting, the gentlemanly side of hunting. We’ve come to represent an appreciation of a certain lifestyle; roughly 30 percent of our circulation is outside the southeast.
I bought wood from a Kentucky furniture dealer to frame the exterior and part of the interior of my office. He said it’s reclaimed from barns at Churchill Downs in Louisville, Ky.
In the morning I have green juice from a local farmer and a banana and see my children off to school. After the gym, I’ll sip a green smoothie my husband has made and then head to work. I enjoy hosting lunch in a conference room, either for visitors or our staff. I like to get to know our employees and find out what they’re working on.
We don’t normally write about big game hunting, but the zebra head, which Pierre Manigault, one of my partners, gave me, is my inspiration. It’s named after his grandmother, Gertrude “Gertie” Sanford Legendre, who bagged it. She traveled the globe collecting specimens for the American Museum of Natural History.
The bar is always well-stocked with a variety of bourbons and other spirits; many are gifts from colleagues in the business and master distillers. A few have my name etched on the bottle, and it’s fun to look back and remember who gave them to me. I entertain a lot, and we might have a happy hour or auction here for charities.
Another of Gertie’s mounts is above the bar. The resin antlers are simply decorative; they seemed to fit.
There are portraits on the walls, but not any of my family members. The portraits are just to add a whimsical element; my family is not that aristocratic.
The mirrored chests are great for storage. They’re likely British colonial, or perhaps Anglo-Indian. I had them moved from my home office and stacked them and added blue and white ginger jars on top. There aren’t many spaces where you can put chests this high. From a design perspective, it’s important to have a piece that draws one’s eye up.
 When I first saw this building, I thought the wall was one of most beautiful things I’d ever seen. I knew I wanted our offices here, and we made it happen.