Your Money|She Just Won 3 Gold Medals for Her Swimming. She’s Only 73.
She Just Won 3 Gold Medals for Her Swimming. She’s Only 73.
Daniela Barnea, who is 73, typically swims for up to an hour and a half, seven days a week. At her age, that kind of workout, during which she covers nearly two miles, is noteworthy.
Even more so is the fact that Ms. Barnea, who lives in Palo Alto, Calif., is a record-breaking swimmer and senior athlete who competes in sanctioned races for her age group in events around the world.
At the 2017 United States Masters Swimming Spring Nationals, in Riverside, Calif., she won three gold medals in the women’s 70-to-74-year-old age group. These included the 100-yard and 200-yard breaststroke finals and the 200-yard individual medley finals.
Hundreds of thousands of senior athletes like Ms. Barnea compete regularly in athletic events throughout the world, including the National Senior Games Association, United States Masters Swimming and USA Track & Field Masters programs. Races are divided into five-year age increments starting at age 35 and ending at 100-to-104. Generally, the athletes range in age from 50 to 100.
A recent documentary, “Impossible Dreamers,” produced by Eric Goldfarb and Erik Howell through Better World Film Group, follows senior athletes who are amateurs as they train for competition. In addition to Ms. Barnea, the 75-minute film (which can be viewed on Netflix and Amazon) spotlights a 91-year-old tennis player, octogenarian racewalkers and septuagenarian sprinters, weight lifters and boxers.
Ms. Barnea is among the youngest featured in the movie. Donald Cheek, known as Doc, a resident of Clovis, Calif., is an international gold medal Masters sprinter at 87. Mr. Cheek repeatedly wins in the 85-to-89 division, competing in the 50-, 100-, 200- and 400-meter events. Last October, in the Huntsman World Senior Games in St. George, Utah, he set the games’ record for 100 meters at 17.38.
Gary Player, the 81-year-old retired professional golfer, also appears in the movie, to offer fitness tips in a 20-minute boot camp workout that is included in the documentary. That instruction is geared toward amateur athletes of all ages who yearn to stay active and, perhaps, to compete.
She schedules her workouts around the time she spends with her three grandchildren and her part-time job as a foreign language tutor for the Palo Alto Unified School District.
For many older people, though, exercising can be a challenge. That’s why the producers of “Impossible Dreamers” decided to give viewers workout tips.
The message, Mr. Goldfarb said, is that “no matter where you are in your life, you do what you can” with regard to fitness.
A few years ago, Ms. Barnea had abdominal surgery and needed to rebuild her swimming regimen slowly. “I could barely swim across the width of pool, but every day I added a few laps, and got stronger and stronger,” she said.
A rotator cuff injury sustained in a dog-walking mishap, when she was pulled abruptly toward a neighbor’s cat, still makes her wince and prevents her from competing in the butterfly, one of her signature events.
But she keeps on stroking. This year, she will enter an estimated 20 competitions. “You need to trust yourself, trust the hopes and not the fears, and keep going around the obstacles,” Ms. Barnea said.
Ursula M. Staudinger, a life span psychologist and researcher at the Robert N. Butler Columbia Aging Center at Columbia University, said that exercising in older age is crucial to physical and mental health.
In the “Impossible Dreamers” boot camp video, these senior athletes provide their best advice on how to keep athletes with less lofty ambitions fit.
Mr. Cheek, for example, starts his routine with a variety of relaxed stretches. He and his wife, Patti, are shown lying in bed wearing workout clothes; they lift their legs in the air, curl their toes and spin their ankles in each direction.
Then Mr. Cheek moves on to high-step skipping, with the emphasis on lifting his knees. He also recommends standing in place and moving your feet as fast as you can. “Do it rhythmically, and move your arms as fast as you can,” he said.
In the documentary, Mr. Player is shown pacing on a treadmill, lifting light weights, doing situps and running rapidly in small steps. “You’ve got to keep the body moving like a piece of elastic,” he says in the film.
These exercises help keep him performing well on the golf course. “All you need is 10 minutes on the treadmill every day,” he says.
