Spiked Bismarck palm fronds, dramatic clusters of ­flamingo-pink anthuriums, flowering quince branches — MetaFlora’s bold arrangements are unexpected and irreverent, marrying ikebana-inflected minimalism with a dash of kitsch. Founder Marisa Competello, a former fashion stylist, constructs her sculptural compositions — which she often coats in layers of spray paint — from her Chinatown studio in Manhattan. ‘‘My work is an overdose of the ’80s,’’ she says.
Competello is one of the highly individual, personality-­driven floral designers who are pushing the craft in new directions. Rather than fetishizing a particular flower or color, their focus is on composition — the more distinctive, the better — a clear departure from the tidy, symmetrical centerpieces that defined the early 2000s floral aesthetic. Their styles may differ wildly — spare and undone, Pop Arty and daring, or wild and painterly — but along with form, the thing that unites these young designers is the depth of inspiration they find in the palette, mood and proportions of work by painters and graphic artists.
Competello’s arrangements, for example, recall the loud, neon-pastel prints of Patrick Nagel — an ­era-of-excess maximalist who created racy illustrations for Playboy, new-wave Duran Duran album covers and winking Budweiser ads. Like Nagel’s cartoonish, color-blocked illustrations, the 40-year-old’s work has a defiantly unnatural ­quality: Monstera leaves are snipped into blunt geometric shapes with scissors and palms are spotted with purple polka dots; entire bouquets are painted cornflower blue or chalk white. ‘‘I am into things that don’t look like flowers — hardy, tropical, sexy plants,’’ she says.
Sophia Moreno-Bunge’s designs exist in an entirely different world than ­Competello’s: They are deceptively simple and soulful, as if swept up from a field of wildflowers and dropped into a vase. ‘‘I think it’s challenging to see what you can evoke with a small amount of materials,’’ says the 30-year-old, who worked with New York City florist Emily Thompson for more than two years before returning to her native Los Angeles in 2015 to start her Santa Monica studio, Isa Isa. Indeed, air and space play as prominent a role as flora in Moreno-Bunge’s bouquets, which often consist of a spare amount of willowy blooms: Queen Anne’s lace, love-in-a-mist and pampas grass, all precisely anchored in a flower frog concealed by a squat vase, their ­needle-thin stems largely exposed. She looks to the abstract, highly saturated work of nonagenarian Lebanon-born painter and poet Etel Adnan. ‘‘I relate to her use of color, but I’m most inspired by her ­devotion. She painted the same mountain in Northern California for almost 20 years,’’ says ­Moreno-Bunge, who discovered Adnan’s work last year during an artist residency in Sicily.
