It’s arguably the biggest story in the Asia Pacific region: the standoff over North Korea and its weapons program.
To put the latest developments in context, I called Choe Sang-Hun, The New York Times’s correspondent in Seoul, South Korea. He’s been covering the Korean Peninsula for us since 2005, and on any given week, he writes a handful of news articles and analytical features, along with the occasional personal reflection.
Our discussion covered a lot of ground. I asked him about North Korea’s latest provocation, when it fired a missile over Japan; I asked about where Australia ranks in terms of North Korea’s priorities; and of course, we discussed President Trump and how he is viewed in the region.
Is there anything you think people don’t fully understand about this conflict? What do you think people might miss?
“It always helps to know a little bit of history on the Korean Peninsula, to see this current event in historical context. You have to remember that Korea used to be one nation, and it was divided against Koreans’ wishes into a Communist North and a pro-American South at the end of World War II. That division was vastly unpopular among all Koreans, and that was the basis of the war; the war was a war for unification.
Can you imagine a unified Korean Peninsula in your lifetime? Can you imagine that as a possibility? I’m just curious.
“I’m a South Korean, and you know, since childhood, we have been taught to believe that unification with North Korea is national wish No. 1. And there is even a song called called our national wish No. 1, which is about unification with North Korea.
If you’re looking for more coverage of North Korea and the rest of Asia, you can always visit our Asia page.
I’d also encourage you to check out The Times on Snapchat, where some of our North Korea coverage is proving to be especially well read by younger readers in Australia, the U.S. and Canada.
Below (as usual) you’ll find some other reports in The Times that piqued my interest this week, plus some music recommendations from my Australian colleagues.
As always, share this newsletter if you enjoy it, tell us what you think at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| and if you’re a subscriber, join us in our private Facebook group for even more conversation.
You should sign up for the Australia edition of our Morning Briefing too!
Overwhelmed by the news from Texas and Louisiana since the storm once known as Hurricane Harvey made landfall? Here’s an overview of The Times’s latest coverage. It’s one of several guides we’ve started producing to help readers manage the full scope of our coverage of big news events.
Is professional tennis becoming like basketball, where only the super tall can survive and thrive? Maybe. Just ask Martina Hingis. Or any of the men on tour who are not quite gigantic. While we’re at it, don’t forget to follow live updates on the U.S. Open from our talented tennis writers.
Methyl Ethel. This was part of the playlist that Brook Mitchell, a Sydney photographer, played as we drove to meet Clinton Pryor in southern New South Wales. There’s a melancholy energy to it that seemed to work well for a pre-dawn drive.
Jen Cloher. Tacey Rychter, our audience growth editor (who just got engaged to Will Cuming a.k.a., LANKS, a Melbourne musician who layers ethereal vocals over electronica) suggested this one. Jen is Courtney Barnett’s partner and her new album reminded me a bit of Lou Reed, but updated, and Aussie.
What else should I be listening to? Send your new musical favorites (Australian or not) to |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| with a sentence about why you love them, and I’ll include a few selections in my next newsletter.
One more thing: Here’s our monthly guide to Netflix Australia. I’m still catching up with “Game of Thrones” so no new shows for me!