Vice President Mike Pence’s recent swing through Latin America quickly acquired an unwanted label: the cleanup tour. Almost everywhere Mr. Pence went, one question followed: Did President Trump really mean it when he spontaneously threatened a United States military intervention in Venezuela? Mr. Pence did his best to disavow Mr. Trump’s words without actually saying that was his intent.
Every administration suffers its share of “what the president meant to say” moments. Even the most disciplined commander-in-chief misspeaks from time to time. Take one last question at a news conference, tackle an unfamiliar issue, talk too loosely at a fund-raiser, and the damage is done. Aides quickly deny the plain meaning of the president’s words, contort them to conform to policy, or feign outrage that anyone could have failed to grasp what the president meant.
This, however, is not just any administration. Just listen, and Mr. Trump’s discordant policy notes sour nearly every foreign policy tune.
Mr. Trump threatens to make South Korea pay for missile defense and seems to invite Seoul and Tokyo to build their own nuclear arsenals; Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis jumps in to say never mind. Secretary of State Rex Tillerson seeks to calm the crisis between Saudi Arabia and Qatar; Mr. Trump’s tweets embolden the Saudis to double down in the feud. Mr. Tillerson, National Security Adviser H.R. McMaster, Mr. Mattis and the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., advocate preserving the nuclear agreement with Iran; Mr. Trump scolds, “If it was up to me, I would have had them noncompliant 180 days ago.” Mr. Trump calls for banning transgender people from the military; an array of senior Pentagon officials, including General Dunford, say the policy remains unchanged. When Mr. Trump finally issues a formal order weeks later, Mr. Mattis says it will require further study to implement.
Mr. Trump’s off-his-own-reservation moments matter. The National Security Act of 1947 — which established the National Security Council — laid the foundation for a deliberate, multitiered process, managed by the national security adviser, to bring government agencies together to debate and decide policy. These sessions typically culminate in a meeting of the National Security Council itself, chaired by the president. There, the commander-in-chief can choose among the options his advisers present or make his own prescriptions. Senior officials and diplomats then enunciate and carry out the administration’s policy.
Mr. Trump’s disdain for this process is sowing confusion around the world. Even the most respected members of the administration never know for sure if they are speaking for the president — and neither do our allies or adversaries. This means the building blocks of a solid strategy — deliberation, clarity, predictability — are being pulled out from under the national security edifice.
Worse still, this cacophony could cause close friends to hedge and look elsewhere for more reliable partners, as Germany’s chancellor, France’s president and Canada’s foreign minister all suggested might be necessary. It could also cause enemies to miscalculate.
The recent episode with North Korea is especially illustrative. It would be one thing if Mr. Trump’s ad-lib had put its leader, Kim Jong-un, on notice that Pyongyang’s actual use of a nuclear weapon would provoke an overwhelming American response. That’s Deterrence 101 and the right message to send, albeit without the rhetorical excess.
It is another thing entirely to say, as Mr. Trump did, that any more threats to the United States from Pyongyang would result in America’s fire and fury. Predictably, Mr. Kim immediately called his bluff, threatening to unleash “an enveloping fire” around Guam, the United States territory in the western Pacific Ocean. And this week he launched a missile over Japan.
So where is the fire and fury?
We are left with equally bad consequences. On the one hand, losing face in a verbal exchange with North Korea’s dictator undercuts the United States’ credibility with both our allies and adversaries. Each time Mr. Trump blusters without backing it up, he weakens his rhetorical punch, to the point where enemies will dismiss every utterance as hot air. The result may be to talk himself into a corner where the only way out is to lash out with force.
On the other hand, Mr. Trump’s overheated, loose language could accidentally propel us into war on the Korean Peninsula. It feeds Mr. Kim’s paranoia that the United States seeks to end his regime, and not just his missile and nuclear programs. Mr. Kim is highly unlikely to strike first, knowing that doing so would result in his annihilation. But by rhetorically lowering the bar to American action, Mr. Trump could cause Mr. Kim to misinterpret carefully limited United States military moves — like flying B-1 bombers over the Korean Peninsula — as the start of a regime-ending attack. Mr. Kim might then cash in his failed nuclear insurance policy and try to take his enemies down with him.
Maybe Mr. Trump’s unbridled bravado is aimed at his domestic political base. But what worked during a campaign is the height of irresponsibility in office, when people around the world hang on an American president’s every utterance. Especially when it comes to national security, there is a premium on an administration speaking clearly, consistently and precisely, starting with the president. Loose lips really can sink ships — and because Mr. Trump cannot control his, this administration’s foreign policy is taking on water.