LONDON — Gal Gadot, DC Comics and the whole Justice League gang are not the only big winners from “Wonder Woman,” the film franchise that has already taken in more than $780 million globally; it just seems to keep on giving (and is already gearing up for a sequel). The latest beneficiaries of the movie’s halo effect: Whitaker Malem, the London leather designers behind the super heroine’s metallic leather armor as well as the armor for her fellow Amazons. They’re this season’s breakout British brand.
“Wonder Woman is our calling card at the moment,” said Keir Malem, 52, sitting with his partner, Paddy Whitaker, also 52, in the loft-like ground floor of their two-story home and atelier in Dalston, East London. Dotted around the walls are mementos from their travels mixed in with seminal artworks from the 20th-century Italian maestro Lucio Fontana and a 1970s 3D spotted torso by the British pop artist Allen Jones. The two men, who uncannily look and dress alike, had just returned from a five-month stint making more leather armor on location in Australia for Wonder Woman’s sister movie, “Aquaman,” scheduled for release in December 2018.
Called “beyond cool” by New York magazine, Wonder Woman’s armor has become a breakout star in its own right. “We were allowed to go close to the body and do sexy armor, which is unusual, as a lot of armor is massive,” Mr. Malem said.
And the arty French Double magazine featured Joan Severance, the model and actress, wearing one of their molded black bustier collaborations with Allen Jones in its current spring/summer issue. “We’d never been in that magazine before,” Mr. Malem said. Now “we’re exposed to a whole new audience.” Even Donatella Versace riffed on the Wonder Woman look in her recent couture collection, with a corseted catsuit glittering with nearly 8,000 sequins and a gold leather minidress.
Though best known today for their film work, which has included Luke Evans’s red leather jacket in this year’s “Beauty and the Beast,” as well as the 2008 “Dark Knight” bat suit, Whitaker Malem began life as a fashion house in 1988, focusing on leather. The designers had met by chance at a house party in London two years earlier; Mr. Whitaker was studying fashion design at Central Saint Martins and Mr. Malem was acting at the Tricycle Theater in Kilburn, northwest London, after dropping out of a hairdressing course at the London College of Fashion.
After two runway collections and after dressing such names as Paula Abdul and Cher in leather, however, the two were still struggling to make ends meet, and moved into collaborating with other fashion designers. They made a gold leather dress for Alexander McQueen’s spring/summer 1997 Givenchy collection, and a leather eagle bustier for Tommy Hilfiger’s spring/summer 2000 Red Label.
Still, it was a learning experience that helped them embrace their newfound Wonder Woman fame.
Mr. Malem and Mr. Whitaker are now focusing on personal fine art work, funded by their movie fees, which largely involves male and female bodies fashioned in leather and spliced together to create a wall sculpture.
“We’re going to show the Wonder Woman Barbie dolls because they are so accurate, but not in their boxes,” Mr. Whitaker said. Instead, he said, the plan is to show them under acrylic “in a cool, slightly ironic way to celebrate the pop art side of things.” Photographs of the leather working process will also be on display, including illustrations of how the costume was gilded with gold, silver, copper and aluminum leaf.
As to whether he was worried Wonder Woman’s appeal might be over by the late autumn, Mr. Whitaker shook his head. “The Wonder Woman Blu-ray and DVD comes out for Christmas,” he said.