New plays are portraying and exploring opioid addiction, using the theater industry’s response to the AIDS epidemic as a model.
KENT, Ohio — An epidemic that fills coffin after coffin with people in their 20s. Activist-minded theatermakers who work furiously between funerals to bring the tragedy to life onstage. Audience members who express fear that if nothing changes, they or someone they love will be gone soon, too.
For those who remember New York during the AIDS crisis, these scenes conjure heartbreaking memories of attending memorial services for friends and lovers and then watching new plays like “Angels in America” and “The Normal Heart” through tears. Yet, increasingly for many people across Ohio and nationwide, the theater world’s response to an emergency health crisis isn’t history — it’s happening. The killer this time isn’t H.I.V. It’s heroin.
At least five plays about heroin abuse have been produced in northeast Ohio alone in the last year as the state’s residents grapple with the surging epidemic. The Columbus Dispatch reported in May that at least 4,149 Ohioans died from unintentional overdoses of heroin, fentanyl and other drugs in 2016, a 36 percent jump from the prior year. This year’s overdose fatalities are set to outpace last year’s, according to the report.
Heroin-themed plays have surfaced elsewhere recently, too: at a high school in New Market, Md.; a community theater in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.; and a children’s theater in Roanoke, Va. And on Broadway this spring, the new play “Sweat” — which won the Pulitzer Prize in drama in April — featured two characters who abuse heroin in working-class Reading, Pa.
The author, Lynn Nottage, spent time there, doing research for the play and learning more about the opioid menace. She said similarities between the theatrical responses to the heroin and AIDS crises were striking.
For Emelia Sherin of Warren, Ohio, it was after the eighth person from her high school died that she and a friend, Zach Manthey, 22, decided to write a play. In working-class Trumbull County, where Warren is, there were 82 overdoses, 10 of them fatal, in two weeks this year.
The result is “(In)dependent: The Heroin Project,” a drama based on some 50 interviews with heroin users, counselors, family members and others that runs through Saturday at the Akron Civic Theater. The Akron area has been particularly hard hit, with the Akron Board of Education’s recently voting to stock the anti-overdose drug Narcan in middle and high schools this fall.
Ms. Sherin and Mr. Manthey’s play is a docu-theater piece — similar in style to “The Laramie Project,” about the murder of Matthew Shepard — with characters that include a Mormon convert, a drag queen and a father in Narcotics Anonymous. Heroin itself takes the stage as a female character, “like a Siren,” Mr. Manthey said.
But unlike New York or Hollywood, Ohio has a relatively low bar for those seeking to make art: Grab a script and a stage, and it’s cheap to put on a show. Community theater and college drama groups offer an expeditious outlet for artists, many of them novices. Ms. Sherin and Mr. Manthey are students at Kent State University; Mr. Vovos studied playwriting at the University of Nevada, Las Vegas, and works at American Greetings in suburban Cleveland.
There are important differences between the AIDS and heroin plays, of course. AIDS devastated gay New York, at the center of the theater world, and hit people in that industry particularly hard. AIDS claimed the lives of many theater artists, like the playwright Scott McPherson, who died at 33 and whose black comedy “Marvin’s Room” is now on Broadway. Many AIDS-themed plays were set in cities, while many of today’s heroin plays are about local communities and, for the most part, have not received wide exposure.
“If you’re trying to write about the world we live in, you ignore what’s going on at your peril,” said the playwright Jonathan Tolins (“Buyer & Cellar”), who has written several plays with characters coping with AIDS and its footprint.
It’s too soon to know if heroin plays will have the lasting power of award-winning works like “Angels in America,” which is currently being revived in London with a starry cast that includes Andrew Garfield and Nathan Lane. “The Normal Heart,” like “Angels,” was made into an HBO movie. The recent Broadway revival of William Finn’s musical “Falsettos,” written during the height of the AIDS crisis, received five Tony Award nominations.
But many members of his ticket-buying base are reeling because of heroin. Some Buckeye State businesses are having a hard time finding workers who can pass drug tests. The situation has been likened to “an ongoing terrorist attack,” as one Ohio newspaper editor recently put it.
What Mr. Parr can offer, as AIDS plays did for so many theatergoers in pain, is a kind of safe house.
