BERLIN — A Vietnamese man at the center of an unusual diplomatic spat between Berlin and Hanoi has been arrested and extradited to Germany, where he is wanted on suspicion of involvement in the abduction last month of a high-ranking construction executive.
The man, identified only as Long N.H., 46, was arrested in the Czech Republic on Aug. 12 and returned to Berlin, German federal prosecutors said on Thursday. His extradition, carried out on Wednesday, came three weeks after the executive, Trinh Xuan Thanh, was returned to Vietnam.
Mr. Thanh, 51, fled Vietnam last year amid accusations of economic mismanagement, and sought political asylum in Germany. But on July 23, a day before his case was set to be heard, Long N.H. dragged Mr. Thanh and a companion from a Berlin street into a Volkswagen van he had rented in Prague a few days earlier, German prosecutors said.
Mr. Thanh was later taken “against his will” to Vietnam and placed in state custody, in an episode that has strained diplomatic relations between the two countries and led to the expulsion of Vietnam’s top intelligence official in Germany, the prosecutors said.
Long N.H. is formally under investigation for unlawful foreign intelligence activity and being an accessory to deprivation of liberty, prosecutors said.
Mr. Thanh was dismissed from Vietnam’s National Assembly last year and accused of economic mismanagement as chairman of PetroVietnam Construction that resulted in losses of about $145 million for the company, a subsidiary of the state-owned oil giant PetroVietnam. He had also been a senior official in the southern province of Hau Giang.
Separately, Germany’s Office for Migration and Refugees said it had suspended one of its employees pending an inquiry into whether he had provided tips to the Vietnamese authorities about Mr. Thanh’s presence in Germany. The move came after provocative statements about the executive were discovered on the employee’s Facebook page. The posts were first reported last week by the Süddeutsche Zeitung newspaper.
In one example from October cited by the newspaper, the employee had questioned what would happen if the “criminal” Mr. Thanh happened to be discovered in Germany.
This month, Mr. Thanh was shown on state-run television in Vietnam saying that he had come back to the country after encouragement from his family and friends “to seek the forgiveness of the party, the government and the law,” referring to the governing Communist Party.
It was not clear whether his statement was sincere or coerced.
Before his return, the authorities in Vietnam had submitted a request for Mr. Thanh’s extradition from Germany.
German federal prosecutors on Aug. 10 took over the investigation into Mr. Thanh’s abduction from the authorities in Berlin. The next day, a warrant was issued for the arrest of Long N.H.
Diplomatic relations between the two countries have been fraught in recent years, primarily because of Germany’s criticism of Vietnam’s human rights record. The countries, however, also share a cultural connection: Many Vietnamese lived and worked in East Germany before the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, and about 20,000 people of Vietnamese origin now live in Berlin.