We’re supposed to be fixated, at the moment, on the shock of a president capable of finding “fine people” among hordes of white supremacists. More than a week ago, Donald Trump spent a lot of a news conference asserting such a thing was possible. According to him, there isn’t much difference between the supremacists who were protesting the removal of a statue memorializing the Confederate general Robert E. Lee in a park in Charlottesville, Va., and the appalled folks responding with a protest of their own. And that’s despite the murder of one and the injury of dozens of others after a 20-year-old nationalist plowed his car into a crowd.
But to watch the movies or TV — or even to catch the hype for a certain boxing match — is to know that normalized white supremacy has been here all summer. It’s to know that the people who manufacture all sorts of popular culture have also, intentionally or not, tossed some racism onto the assembly line. It’s to know that whatever occurred in Charlottesville and then at that news conference didn’t happen in a vacuum. They were just the gnarliest flare-ups in a season of provocations that seem so business-as-usual that they scarcely feel provoked.
How else could anyone explain Lee? Not the aforementioned hero of the Confederacy but the dunce from ABC’s “The Bachelorette.” Normally, “The Bachelor” and “The Bachelorette” feature a gentleman or a lady who leaps into a heterosexual pool of suitors and climbs out with a potential spouse. That was more or less true this season, too. Only, for the first time ever, a black woman took the plunge. And the show, which concluded earlier this month, seemed to be of two minds: It didn’t want to make a big deal about it but understood what a big deal it was. So it played games.
Before its official kickoff, in a sort of televised tailgate party, the bachelorette, Rachel, met a few of her suitors. One was a sweetie named Dean, who told her that he was “ready to go black,” as if he were preparing to head deep into outer space. But at least he seemed to understand the journey. Lee, a white musician from Florida, was stuck on dreary old Earth. His interest in Rachel went only as far as robbing other contestants of time with her. His primary targets were the other black men on the show, namely Kenny, a charming pro wrestler, whom Lee characterized to Rachel as “aggressive” and about whom he fabricated an altercation that culminated in Kenny’s heaving Lee from a van.
He does, however, understand racism. At some point during the show’s run, lots of Lee’s old tweets surfaced. They were homophobic, anti-Muslim and sexist. His comparison, in one, of the N.A.A.C.P. to the K.K.K. felt almost Trumpian. Apparently, the people who make “The Bachelorette” could envision marrying off a black bachelorette only if in the process it risked a race war, even a banal one.
The week before the final episode, the show gathered some of its contestants, including Lee and Kenny, to rehash their behavior in front of a live audience. The men — and not only the black ones — seemed baffled and truly hurt as they confronted and chastised Lee: What was he doing on a dating show starring a black woman? There was something powerfully novel in seeing a handful of black men confronting a white racist.
But it became fascinatingly fruitless television. They did so much talking about the wrongs of Lee’s racism that he was barely required to answer for himself. The show seemed to want us to feel bad for his being singled out, even though Lee only sort of seemed to understand the trouble he was in. Someone even offered to hug it out with him, and I screamed into my pillow. Whether or not the show encouraged him to lie about being assaulted, Lee managed to evoke a whole dismaying history of black men being falsely accused by white people of all kinds of violence. At this point, what would a hug resolve? It’s the water pill of racial reconciliation.
It would be a pitiful defense, but the makers of “The Bachelorette” could always point to that live special as an attempt to solve a problem — even one they had invented! Isn’t a water pill preferable to whatever Floyd Mayweather Jr. and Conor McGregor got up to last month? They toured four cities together to promote their desperately anticipated, stupefyingly lucrative boxing match on Saturday, Aug. 26, that Showtime will broadcast by pay-per-view.
The tour made a quick descent into a kind of racial taunting that felt aptly vestigial for a sport in decline, and grew only more deplorable as it went. On each stop — in Los Angeles, Toronto, Brooklyn and London — Mr. McGregor would work the capacity crowds into a lather by asserting a particular style of supremacy over his future opponent, who’s undefeated and flamboyantly black. Mr. McGregor is a compact and ornately tattooed white Dubliner with no professional boxing bona fides (his championship skills belong to the mixed martial arts). What he may lack in boxing experience, he makes up for in both swagger and the sort of obnoxiously tailored suiting whose flattery extends to his crotch.
“Dance for me, boy!” Mr. McGregor barked to Mr. Mayweather on the first two stops. The tour’s ostensible psychological goal was for the men to get in each other’s head. But Mr. McGregor, seeking a full-body invasion, aimed to get under Mr. Mayweather’s black skin. The culmination came in Brooklyn, when Mr. McGregor — wearing just loafers; snug, patterned pants whose dominant color was pink; and a white fur coat with a giant snake on the back (oh, and gold sunglasses) — rebutted complaints that he’s a racist.
“Ridiculous,” he said. “Do they not know I’m half black? I’m half-black from the bellybutton down!” 
Boxing has a long history of mixing racism and ethnic pride to sell a fight. The Mayweather-McGregor bout is an especially noxious entry, in which Mr. Mayweather was jeered on principle and Mr. McGregor turned to a kind of racism because the crowds seemed to enjoy the turn. Mr. Mayweather played nasty, too, veering into homophobic put-downs, but he didn’t mock his opponent’s race — or, amazingly, for the most part, his clothes. But he also never called out Mr. McGregor’s strategy either, which seems illuminating, since Mr. Mayweather, as an owner of the company promoting the fight, stands to make a ton of money. Why not turn a profit on the national mood, too?
Nonetheless, everything about the Irishman’s performance — from commands that Mr. Mayweather dance to Mr. McGregor’s own nonstop nervous shuffling — seemed like something from America’s enormous minstrel-show catalog. Mr. McGregor never painted his face black, but neither did lots of early white minstrels. In the mid 19th century, they concocted bigger-than-life heroes that riled up audiences with bravado and vulgarity and simulations of working-class strength, eventually at the expense — or with the assistance — of black culture. Almost 200 years later, here was Mr. McGregor conducting a virtual séance of American ghosts.
The enthusiasm for Mr. McGregor was so high and our comfort with this kind of unexamined racist performance so ingrained that even after that “half-black” business, it wasn’t until Mr. McGregor bragged, in Brooklyn, that his fur coat was made of polar bears that anybody booed him.
Not too long ago, men like Lee and Mr. McGregor remained hidden within message boards. They were anonymous Twitter eggs. But now the eggs have hatched and some of those people are feeling free to come out of their supremacist shell.
We saw some of those people in Charlottesville. Hundreds of men — young men — (and some women) marching in the night. Watching the way photography froze many of their faces into a rictus of rage was chilling. Some of that dismay came from seeing how perfectly basic they were — or what, about nine months ago, you might have called “normcore.” Almost everyone who walked by any camera looked like a classmate or an acquaintance. Some of them looked like contestants on “The Bachelorette,” carrying props from its set.
Last month, HBO announced plans for a dramatic series called “Confederate,” which hypothesizes what America might look like if the rebels had won the Civil War. Many people objected to it, in part, because the announcement struck a note of privilege — or cluelessness: What country were the producers living in? You didn’t need to see the people with the tiki torches to suspect the show might seem redundant. The war, to many, really doesn’t seem over.
That was also some of the problem with “Detroit,” a docudrama that opened at the very end of July, and sought to recreate racial violence that occurred in 1967 as a way of seeing the racial violence occurring today. The movie combed the title city looking for a harrowing-enough story upon which to feast its fly-on-the-wall filmmaking, and settled on a motel that became a de facto detention center overseen by racist cops. The police killed three black men, tortured others and were acquitted of everything. Some of the distrust surrounding “Confederate” plays out in “Detroit” — that it might be more interested in death, humiliation and suffering among black people than it ever is in life.
Whatever white supremacy was and is — the murderousness of the K.K.K., the centuries-old institutional bias toward white people, the self-pitying narcissism of the so-called alt-right — it’s older than what happened in Charlottesville, older than this presidency. It’s wedged in the bedrock of American popular culture. Even when you aren’t looking, it manages to find you.
Not too long ago, I was enjoying “Logan Lucky,” the new Steven Soderbergh heist movie, when I noticed that in the inmate-visitation scenes, the white characters were put in the foreground while the black prisoners sat in the distance. I really like “Logan Lucky,” but I also found myself wondering how many times lesser directors used similar framing in other movies and I hadn’t even noticed.
I saw a similar configuration in an episode of “The Sinner,” a series that just started on USA, which is all about why Jessica Biel stabbed a stranger to death on a beach. This summer’s heist sleeper, “Baby Driver,” comes up with a different treatment of incarceration, speeding through a white character’s sentence to get to its romantic ending. The crime thriller “Good Time” tries the “Scared Straight” approach, throwing a terrified white character into a jail cell teeming with feral black men. In American culture, white characters visit prison, but anonymous black people tend to live there.
There’s no equating the people responsible for any of this work with the people who descended upon Charlottesville in General Lee’s name. But the criminal-justice apparatus that preys upon black men has wound up linking blackness and incarceration statistically — and, apparently, culturally. So you’re free to imagine a casting situation in which people are trying to make, say, a prison visitation scene with the movie’s white protagonists more authentic. How about putting some brown smudges in the frame?
Calling for the removal of statues, street names, even the sitting president might feel right. But doing so is a separate project from truly considering the institutions that led to their installation. For that, you need something more radical than protests. You need real education. You need a kind of racial chemotherapy. You need producers and executives who know better. In the meantime, this is the culture we’ve got. Those smudges were in the frame long before this president, and they’re likely to be there long after he’s gone.