DENVER — An assertive Taylor Swift told a Denver jury on Thursday that there was no question she was intentionally groped in 2013 by a radio host who is suing her because, he says, she falsely accused him and cost him his career.
Ms. Swift said that the former host, David Mueller, was trying to evade responsibility for his actions and that whatever trouble he finds himself in, he had brought on himself.
“I’m not going to allow you or your client to make me feel like this was my fault, because it isn’t,” Ms. Swift told Mr. Mueller’s lawyer, Gabriel McFarland, testifying with confidence, irritation and flashes of humor during an hour on the stand.
She repeated her assertion that Mr. Mueller put his hand up her dress and grabbed her bottom as he posed for a photograph with her before a concert in Denver on June 2, 2013. Mr. Mueller sued in 2015, saying Ms. Swift’s account had led the Denver radio station KYGO to fire him, and has kept him from working in the industry. Ms. Swift then countersued, accusing Mr. Mueller of assault and battery.
“I’m being blamed for the unfortunate events of his life that are a product of his decisions. Not mine,” Ms. Swift said as the jurors — six women and two men — listened intently.
Ms. Swift said it appeared to her that night that Mr. Mueller and his girlfriend at the time, who accompanied him, had been drinking because he was talking loudly and she was laughing often. Mr. Mueller and the woman have each said they had nothing to drink before the photo session.
As Ms. Swift testified, Mr. Mueller turned his chair to face her. Under questioning, she occasionally sparred with Mr. Mueller’s lawyer.
At one point, for example, Mr. McFarland asked why, in the photograph she took with Mr. Mueller, the hem of her skirt does not appear to be pushed up in the front.

She was firm in her depiction of Mr. Mueller’s behavior.
Mr. McFarland turned attention to her behavior, asking why she had not reacted immediately and instead waited until she had greeted others from the line before making her complaint. She said she did not want to ruin the evening for her fans and that, stunned, she had almost gone on autopilot as Mr. Mueller left.
“I just said in a monotonous voice, ‘Thank you for coming,’” she said.
Mr. McFarland appeared to be taken by surprise when Ms. Swift’s lawyer, Douglas Baldridge, said he had no questions for Ms. Swift. That led to a slight delay and a lecture from the judge because Mr. McFarland’s next witness was not immediately available.
In the afternoon, Mr. McFarland called Ms. Swift’s photographer and road manager, who were in the room during the photo session, in an attempt to show that no one saw what Ms. Swift had earlier described. But Ms. Swift’s aides were adamant on the stand that, while they may not have seen any groping, they believed it had occurred based on what was seen in the photograph and how Ms. Swift reacted.
The photographer, Stephanie Simbeck, who shot the image of her boss, Mr. Mueller and his girlfriend at the time, told the court she has taken some 20,000 photographs of Ms. Swift with fans at meet-and-greets. In all that time, she said, she had never seen Ms. Swift react the way she did when the photo with Mr. Mueller as taken. She saw Ms. Swift move to get away from Mr. Mueller with an uncomfortable look on her face. Because of that, when Ms. Swift said she had been groped, Ms. Simbeck thought immediately of him and found the photo to show Ms. Swift, who confirmed he was the man she was talking about.
Ms. Swift’s mother, Andrea Swift, who testified on Wednesday, was not in court on Thursday because she was not feeling well, Mr. Baldridge told the judge.
Andrea Swift had been emotional at times as she spoke on Wednesday about the shock she felt when her daughter told her she had been groped. Andrea Swift went on to describe deciding to make an issue of it to protect her daughter, who was 23 at the time, and other young girls.
The trial, expected to last nine days, has drawn fans of Ms. Swift. Ed Lee, a 50-year-old graphic artist from Seattle, took time from visiting relatives in Colorado to bring his 10-year-old daughter to a trial he said demonstrates lesson he tries to teach her.
