There are many reasons the Yankees sit firmly atop the American League wild-card standings: the star outfielder Aaron Judge; the All-Star starter Luis Severino; and the stellar bullpen, including Dellin Betances, Tommy Kahnle and others.
Shortstop Didi Gregorius, however, has quietly been the engine of this team. In the Yankees’ 5-3 win over the intracity rival Mets on Wednesday — a game featuring the Mets’ bizarre use of catcher Travis d’Arnaud as both a second and third baseman — Gregorius provided further proof of his impact.
With the scored tied at 3-3 in the seventh inning, Gregorius came to the plate with the bases loaded and two outs. Mets reliever Paul Sewald had put himself in this bind by allowing a leadoff double and walking two batters (though ball four against Aaron Hicks could have been called a strike).
After Judge popped out for the inning’s second out, Gregorius stepped up. And when Sewald threw a pitch to the sweet spot inside, Gregorius’s quick hands smacked the ball down the right field line for a two-run double to put the Yankees ahead. Standing at second base, Gregorius pointed at the Yankees’ dugout and waved his hands in glee.
“This whole series they’ve been throwing me changeups, and they tried to switch it up on me, and I was prepared for it,” he said.
Despite having missed the first month of the season with a shoulder injury, Gregorius entered Wednesday’s game as one of the best shortstops in baseball. His .308 average and .835 on-base-plus-slugging percentage ranked behind only Carlos Correa of the Houston Astros and Jean Segura of the Seattle Mariners among major league shortstops.
And with advanced metrics painting Gregorius as one of the better defensive shortstops, Gregorius may be the Yankees’ best all-around player not named Judge.
Gregorius certainly did not do it alone on Wednesday, though. Judge provided the most impressive hit, a fourth-inning home run off Mets starter Robert Gsellman that landed in the third deck of left field at Citi Field and then one-hopped into Section 536 — an area where fans should never expect to receive home run balls.
The home run was measured at 457 feet, but Judge’s teammates thought it went further. He paid little attention as he ran around the bases. “They pointed to where it went,” he said.
Judge and Gregorius helped give a two-run cushion to David Robertson, who was called on to close as Aroldis Chapman was nursing a hamstring injury and Betances unavailable because of his recent workload. Aside from a wild pitch that allowed Amed Rosario to reach first, Robertson had little trouble closing out the ninth.
That concluded a game that had pitched back and forth over the first six innings, the Yankees and the Mets both manufacturing runs with sacrifice flies or groundouts. The only homers came from Judge and Mets catcher Rene Rivera, who tied the game in the fifth.
Neither starter — the Yankees’ Jaime Garcia or Gsellman — pitched all that well, each allowing three runs before being pulled in the sixth inning.
Gsellman also had to start amid an infield configuration that included two catchers. During batting practice, infielders Jose Reyes and Wilmer Flores were scratched; the Mets said each had a sore left rib cage that had begun the day before.
So Mets Manager Terry Collins came up with a makeshift solution: He shifted the more nimble d’Arnaud from catcher to third base and had Rivera start behind the plate. D’Arnaud borrowed third baseman David Wright’s glove to make his first start at the position in his 11 years in professional baseball.
“It was the only option we had,” Collins said.
D’Arnaud was excited to play the infield, which he had played once in the minor leagues and often as a kid. He was not afraid of a ball being hit to him.
“I wanted to make a diving play or a diving play down the line or rob someone of a base hit like people do to me,” he said.
To ease the defensive burden on d’Arnaud, Collins used a tactic from when he was a minor leaguer: He shifted d’Arnaud back and forth with second baseman Asdrubal Cabrera based on the batter and double-play chances. They switched positions 22 times.
If a left-hander was at the plate, d’Arnaud stayed at third, but he switched with Cabrera against right-handers. It worked: D’Arnaud handled only one ball, a pop-up in the ninth inning.
At the plate, d’Arnaud tied the game with a sacrifice fly in the sixth inning that scored Cespedes. But an inning later, as Sewald sputtered, the Yankees took the lead for good, thanks to Gregorius.
There was tension even before the game on the Mets’ side. Gsellman’s start was his first in the major leagues in six weeks after his recovery from a hamstring strain, and it came on the heels of a clash with the Mets’ brass.
