Fall is a time for fresh starts, and there’s something satisfying about seeing veteran chefs break out with restaurants of their own. That’s why Frenchette and Scampi are among the places I’m most looking forward to this season.
Many marriages don’t last 25 years, but Lee Hanson and Riad Nasr, chefs who met at Daniel, have been cooking together that long, mostly for Keith McNally. Now they’re taking their well-oiled culinary collaboration to their own project, Frenchette, in TriBeCa. “We have the same tastes,” Mr. Hanson said. “And we temper each other.” The root of their cooking is French, and their restaurant will have a vintage look, with modern details.
I also have high expectations for PJ Calapa, who cooked in Michael White’s Altamarea Group restaurants for years and is now opening Scampi, a Flatiron district place featuring the cooking of Southern Italy, where Mr. Calapa’s family has roots. He plans to set the record straight on the creatures called scampi (the Italian word refers to langoustine tails), serving them grilled. Over pasta, he plans to use shrimp done scampi-style with lemon and garlic.
In a more modest setting, Jody Williams and Rita Sodi will complement their three-year-old West Village restaurant Via Carota with Pisellino, an Italian-style coffee, wine and cocktail bar serving pastries, sandwiches and small bites in a triangular storefront, declared a landmark, directly across the street.
I’ve always liked the Brasserie, the informal restaurant on the opposite side of the Seagram Building from the Four Seasons. Now that the Major Food Group is in charge of the building’s restaurants, it will become the Lobster Club, a Japanese-style brasserie with a few lobster dishes, headed by the chef Tasuku Murakami. It’s the first American restaurant designed by Peter Marino: The dining room is warmly inviting, with midcentury elegance and touches of whimsy, like flooring patterned with Pollock blobs and swirls. Its bar glows with bronze light, and what used to be a private dining room is boldly done in red with Picasso-style sculptures.
The huge Hudson Yards development on the west side of Manhattan won’t offer any big-name openings until next year. But at Henry Hall, an apartment building at the northern end of the neighborhood, the partners in Charlie Bird and Pasquale Jones — Robert Bohr, Grant Reynolds and the chef Ryan Hardy — will unpack the Zalto stemware for their latest venture, Legacy Records. It will be installed in two floors of a building on the site of the former Legacy Recording Studios, where artists from Yo-Yo Ma to Jimi Hendrix to Jay-Z have played. Mr. Hardy’s menu, mostly seafood, often local, will take its cue from the Riviera.
The inevitable Asian imports this season include the much-anticipated blockbuster DaDong, from China. But more modest, homegrown interpretations of Chinese cuisine will entice me, as they did this year at newcomers like Chinese Tuxedo and Little Tong Noodle Shop. The group that owns Faro may continue to conquer Bushwick, Brooklyn, with weaponized Sichuan noodles at General Debs. Steps from Chinatown, Tang Hotpot will offer savory Sichuan-spiced broths with additions like humble lamb kidneys and tripe, as well as king crab and Wagyu beef luxuries. And for fans of Kings Co Imperial and its locavore menu, there will be an alternative to the restaurant in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, as a branch opens on the Manhattan side of the bridge. I’m also hoping the new Fung Tu, called Nom Wah Tu, will be as inventive as the original.
A few weeks ago, I sampled the lamb burger on a pretzel bun with taleggio cheese made in a special iron pan by Masa Takayama at Tetsu, his new, much-delayed (four years!) TriBeCa restaurant. The restaurant is handsome, done in wood and iron with long stretches of bar; it will serve grilled skewered meats, noodles and Wagyu beef along with the burgers. “It’s the food I like to eat,” Mr. Takayama said.
Some other places that are likely to crowd my calendar are the reprises of two old favorites: L’Atelier de Joël Robuchon and La Goulue. Also tempting are David Laris’s Eden, the Turkish steakhouse Nusr-Et, and an American brasserie, the Loyal, in the West Village from the talented and busy John Fraser.
I’ll plan to toast all these newcomers later this fall at Gibson & Luce, a bar and lounge named for the artist Charles Dana Gibson and the media mogul Henry R. Luce, on the lower level of a building, now Stephen Hanson’s Life Hotel, that was once the headquarters of Life magazine. New life, indeed, for a new season.
Frenchette 241 West Broadway (White Street), October.
General Debs 24 Irving Ave. (Jefferson Street), Bushwick, Brooklyn, September.
Gibson & Luce 19 West 31st Street (Fifth Avenue), October.
Kings Co Imperial 168½ Delancey Street (Clinton Street), November.
L’Atelier de Joël Robuchon 85 10th Avenue (West 15th Street), November.
Legacy Records 517 West 38th Street (10th Avenue), November.
The Lobster Club 98 East 53rd Street (Park Avenue), October.
Nom Wah Tu 22 Orchard Street (Canal Street), September.
The Loyal 289 Bleecker Street (Seventh Avenue South), September.
Pisellino 100 Seventh Avenue South (Grove Street), late December.
Scampi 30 West 18th Street (between Fifth and Sixth Avenues), October.
Tang Hotpot 135 Bowery (Grand Street), September.
Tetsu 78 Leonard Street (Church Street), September.