WHIPPANY, N.J. — The United States national soccer team continues to get younger. Less than a year after making his debut for the squad, the 18-year-old midfielder Christian Pulisic is his country’s most indispensable player. Kellyn Acosta, 22; Jordan Morris, 22; and Bobby Wood, 24, have also become key figures in Coach Bruce Arena’s planning.
And then there is DaMarcus Beasley.
Seventeen years after making his debut, Beasley, 35, is the last player remaining from a generation that raised the level of, and the expectations for, the national team. Joining the team as a teenager a year before the 2002 World Cup, Beasley, along with his contemporary Landon Donovan, became a vital figure for a succession of coaches. Now, more than 100 appearances, and four World Cups, later, he remains a player the team cannot seem to do without.
With his most recent call-up, for World Cup qualifiers against Costa Rica on Friday night in Harrison, N.J., and on Tuesday at Honduras, Beasley is hoping to secure his status on the team and put himself in a position to make the 2018 World Cup roster. If he does, he will join Lothar Matthäus of Germany as the only men’s field players to participate in five World Cups.
After a slow start in qualifying, the Americans have climbed to third place in their group, and need to finish only in the top three of the six-team Concacaf hexagonal to guarantee a place in Russia.
Only then can Beasley, who will be 36 when next summer’s World Cup kicks off, make a case for some kind of role on yet another team.
Such a milestone once seemed unlikely. In 2014, Beasley announced his retirement from the national team, only to return briefly for the Americans’ dismal campaign in the 2015 Gold Cup. But when Jürgen Klinsmann was fired in November, and replaced by Beasley’s first national team manager, Arena, Beasley said he was eager to return and rewrite the ending of his national team career.
“When Bruce gave me a call and asked if I still wanted to be part of the team and have a different role, obviously, I took it with both hands and ran with it,” he said.
The common sentiment among the current roster is that Beasley is a great leader who brings skill, intangibles and experience. The more crucial perspective is that his latest return shows again how the team has repeatedly tried, and failed, to produce a player good enough to keep him out.
But that criticism overlooks something just as noteworthy as Beasley’s potential fifth World Cup: his successful, post-30th-birthday position switch from wing midfielder to left back. The move was crucial in prolonging a career that began when he signed with Major League Soccer in 1999, and it allowed him not only to make Klinsmann’s 2014 World Cup team, but also to start all four of the Americans’ games at the tournament.
 “When he changed to left back, he still has the ability to figure it out, to know what’s going on, to read the game, and do the little things well.
Left back has historically been the United States team’s Achilles’ heel. Because of that, past managers have often opted to use players there out of position. But the left-footed Beasley has mastered the role since making the switch in 2013 (it was one of the main reasons Klinsmann took him to Brazil), and he has evolved into a reliable, if perhaps not everyday, option there.
Beasley shares the role on the national team with Jorge Villafaña, a player eight years his junior who plays his club soccer for Santos Laguna in Mexico. But in June, when Villafaña sustained a minor injury, Arena opted to start Beasley in a high-profile qualifier at Mexico, and despite his being battered by an elbow and beaten for Mexico’s goal, he nonetheless helped the Americans emerge with a 1-1 draw.
Beasley’s willingness to embrace an evolving role, one that even now regularly morphs from understudy to starter, explains his enduring nature.
“DaMarcus, from the first time I saw him, had a natural way of playing,” said Bob Bradley, who was Beasley’s first professional coach in M.L.S., and the one who took him to South Africa with the national team in 2010. “He moved so easily on the field. He had quickness, awareness and ideas of what was going on around him.
Beasley’s club career has not always been smooth. He has played for seven teams in six leagues, and at times he has struggled to earn minutes with the best of them. But he also has a résumé that is uncommon for an American player: a Scottish title with Rangers and Dutch ones with P.S.V. Eindhoven, for whom he became the first American to play in the semifinals of the UEFA Champions League in 2005.
After stops in Germany and Mexico, he returned to M.L.S. in 2014, with a Houston Dynamo team that remains in the playoff hunt a year after a last-place finish.
Now, ahead of two crucial games, Beasley is trying yet again to make himself relevant, even indispensable.
