‘‘Are we being watched?’’ I ask Trevor Paglen at his central Berlin studio. The prewar apartment was once surely the most surveilled place in the city, having formerly belonged to his friend Laura Poitras, the director who helped Edward Snowden go public. ‘‘We’re always being watched,’’ he replies. The space is filled with computers: Against one wall, an assistant writes code while another researches data used to train artificial intelligence. Opposite is a long credenza filled with art monographs and topped by a slightly sinister collection of objets: a Dungeons & Dragons-style dragon trophy with a shield and saber; a toy model of the stealth submarine U.S.S. Jimmy Carter; and ‘‘Black Ops’’ military patches, including some Paglen made himself. In one of them, dinosaurs of the future look up in wonder at the derelict satellites left behind by extinct humans.
Paglen was already well known for his surveillance pieces when Snowden leaked a trove of NSA documents in 2013, but even he was stunned by the revelations — both their magnitude and their specificity. ‘‘I just sat, jaw dropped, for 14 hours straight, reading,’’ says the 42-year-old, who is both affable and ultra-intense, with blue eyes, close-shorn blond hair, motorcycle boots and a kind of native restlessness. His footage of NSA bases was included in ‘‘Citizenfour,’’ Poitras’s Academy Award-winning documentary about Snowden.
Paglen is currently at work on his most radical project yet. This spring, he plans to send a satellite — a reflective, faceted Mylar inflatable — into low orbit, where it will be visible at night from Earth for eight weeks or so, literally twinkling like a diamond in the sky before it disintegrates in the atmosphere. If all goes according to plan, it will be the world’s first space sculpture, unprecedented in contemporary art.
The Orbital Reflector draws a clear parallel between contemporary art and space exploration: the ideal of a purely visionary gesture, and the less starry reality. While the satellite — a small, five-kilogram box called a CubeSat, from which a 100-foot-long inflatable structure will deploy — has no commercial or military purpose, its success depends on the very systems of power Paglen has spent more than a decade critiquing. Built by an aerospace contractor called Global Western, it, likely along with a governmental reconnaissance satellite, will launch from California’s Vandenberg Air Force Base on a Space X rocket into low orbit. The project illustrates how unfeasible it would be to execute any other way: For all the talk of civilian spaceflight, it remains a thoroughly militarized domain.
Paglen’s partner in the project, the Reno-based Center for Art + Environment at the Nevada Museum of Art, is fund-raising to cover the $1.3 million cost. The center’s collection includes extensive material from the giants of land art, including Walter de Maria and Michael Heizer. The Orbital Reflector places Paglen (for the moment, anyway) in this tradition — an artist defying the laws of nature and practicality in order to create a work larger than himself. ‘‘It is a high-risk proposition — rockets do explode; CubeSats sometimes fail to open,’’ says David Walker, the museum’s executive director. ‘‘But it’s exciting, too, because we see outer space as the ultimate mirror for human aspiration.’’ The Orbital Reflector is like the inevitable conclusion to the land art movement; Paglen’s work, like Heizer’s, may start in the desert, but will eventually leave the Earth entirely.
Paglen doesn’t describe himself as a dissident — ‘‘I’m as American as it gets, a product of these contradictions’’ — but it’s impossible not to connect the themes in his work to a childhood spent on military bases. His father was an Air Force ophthalmologist; his mother, one of the first female Episcopalian priests. In third grade, in the San Francisco Bay Area, Paglen got in trouble for skipping school to sneak into lectures on dinosaurs at Berkeley — the same lecture halls in which he’d later be working toward his doctorate. The family moved to Wiesbaden, Germany, when he was 12, and he spent two years in a German school in a nearby village, where, as a foreign student, he was ostracized. ‘‘When you’re not the beneficiary of privilege, suddenly you see it for what it is,’’ he says.
The dragon will be included in the 2018 Smithsonian exhibit. This year’s Metro Pictures exhibit will showcase Paglen’s ongoing work with different kinds of artificial intelligence technologies, taking viewers down a rabbit hole of imagery, from the now quaint-seeming pictures first made by humans in the early 1990s to train military facial recognition software, to the kind of ‘‘invisible images’’ computers hallucinate for themselves — say, when we post an image on Facebook — in order to make sense of the external world. ‘‘This is how an A.I. brain sees a shark,’’ Paglen says back in his studio, looking at a weirdly beautiful Abstract Expressionist-like swath of blues and grays that results from a computer creating a visual amalgam of thousands of images of the animal in water. The exhibit invites critical questions about the extent to which artificial intelligence algorithms, with their potential for programmed-in bias, are governing our reality. It’s also aesthetically provocative: ‘‘Man,’’ a distillation of figurative imagery, vaguely recalls a Francis Bacon portrait; ‘‘Rainbow’’ — a blend of cosmic-like rainbows — a Dali-esque dreamscape. ‘‘It’s like I’m relearning art history,’’ Paglen says.
So how does an artist who has devoted his career to empirical scrutiny of those things that will shape our future, from artificial intelligence to the annexation of space, respond rationally to a time in which reason itself — when it comes to political discourse, at least — seems to be increasingly endangered? ‘‘Those are foundational questions for me,’’ Paglen says. ‘‘Nothing that you make in the world exists in isolation from the social and political and ecological dimensions of it.’’ He hasn’t given up on art’s ability to spark the imagination — and to make us see the things we might prefer not to. The Orbital Reflector presented an opportunity to ‘‘get messy . . . to make something that’s beautiful, but also self-contradictory, and tries to challenge common sense.’’ It’s Carl Sagan meets Dada for a new millennium’s inhumanity.
