New York is becoming a cultural center for young women trying to disrupt the male-dominated industries of design engineering and sex toys.
For Janet Lieberman, making sex toys started as a bit of a joke. In 2013, she was living in Brooklyn and getting ready to leave MakerBot, where she worked as an engineer. When people asked her what she planned to do next, she’d say she wanted to start a sex toy company.
But she noticed that women never laughed.  “Sex is this topic that’s really important to people, but they’re not allowed to talk about it,” said Ms. Lieberman, 32.
Seeing an opportunity, she teamed up with Alexandra Fine, another Brooklyn-based entrepreneur, to start Dame Products. They designed two vibrators, the Fin and the Eva. Since then, the company has gotten widespread media attention (including in The Times), and broken down barriers: Last year, Dame became the first company to receive funding through Kickstarter for a sex toy.
Dame, along with other new companies like Unbound, House of Plume and Sustain, is part of a tech-savvy and female-led women’s sexuality movement that has made its home in New York instead of, say, Silicon Valley. Women, many of them under 40, are updating sex toys and related products with their own needs in mind, and leading the companies that sell them.
If the movement has an ideological center, it’s probably Women of Sex Tech, a group founded last year by Polly Rodriguez, 30, the chief executive and co-founder of Unbound, a Manhattan-based sex toy company that sends subscribers a box of products every quarter, and Lidia Bonilla, 38, who started House of Plume, which sells storage boxes for sex toys.
Based in New York, the group has since expanded to include more than 70 people, including members in California, Spain and China. New York City-based members include Meika Hollender, the co-founder of Sustain, which makes organic and fair trade lubricants and condoms; Mia Davis, who created a sex education app called Tabú; and Bryony Cole, the host of the popular podcast, Future of Sex.
So far, Women of Sex Tech has organized three New York events, including a pop-up marketplace for sex tech start-ups last winter and a panel discussion on sexual health policy at the Museum of Sex in Manhattan in July, and its members have been a part of countless others, such as a live taping of the “Future of Sex” podcast at Fifth House in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, on Aug. 14.
Women of Sex Tech members also participated in an event last June that was billed as “America’s first sex tech hackathon” (such events had taken place previously in Europe). The hackathon, conceived in part to encourage women to enter the field, was held at the Madison Avenue offices of ThoughtWorks, a technology consultancy. Seven teams pitched a panel of judges for a chance to win a month’s membership at Galvanize, which provides office space and educational opportunities for entrepreneurs. The winners, a group of two women and two men, are working on an app called Spinucation that will use examples from the news to help parents talk to their kids about sex.
In 1971, Duane Colglazier and Bill Rifkin opened the Pleasure Chest. The West Village store was the first to sell sex toys in a boutique environment without blacked-out windows, and it attracted many female customers despite its initial focus on gay men. In 1973, the New York City chapter of the National Organization for Women held a women’s sexuality conference that introduced vibrators to the feminist community and helped inspire Dell Williams to open a women’s sex toy store, Eve’s Garden, in Manhattan in 1974.
Today’s tech-focused entrepreneurs are less likely to open a store and more inclined to design products, apps or online services to fill what they see as gaps in the market. Too many sex toy manufacturers assume women don’t appreciate good engineering, Ms. Lieberman said. The result is vibrators made from materials that aren’t safe, or that break after a few uses or short out, potentially injuring sensitive body parts.
Connection is important in business, too. When Mia Davis, 25, tried to get investors and others in Silicon Valley interested in Tabú, the sex education app, she grew frustrated. A lot of men “just sort of tensed up” and “couldn’t get past the discomfort of the subject,” she recalled.
Last February in Greenpoint, Brooklyn, however, Ms. Davis had a different experience. When she participated in the Women of Sex Tech’s pop-up marketplace there, men and women asked how they could get involved in the company, offered to spread the word, and promised to tell their little sisters about the app, she recalled. A man who worked at a sexual health clinic talked to her about the kinds of questions patients tend to have.
Investors and others in the New York business community are more comfortable with consumer products than their counterparts in Silicon Valley, who tend to focus on business-to-business companies, said Liz Klinger, the co-founder and chief executive of Lioness, which makes a vibrator that collects data on women’s sexual responses. Ms. Klinger, 29, whose company is based in Berkeley, Calif., concurs that Silicon Valley can be difficult because it’s so male-dominated. She has been told that female-friendly products are less interesting because “women are only half the population.” Products for men, she said, somehow avoid the same scrutiny. Ms. Klinger recalled one male investor who was unimpressed with her ideas but excited about a device to treat male incontinence.
“Silicon Valley welcomes innovation and disruption in literally every other area except this one,” said Ms. Gallop, the founder of Make Love Not Porn. While there is a sex tech scene in California, she said, so far it lacks a “unifying force” like Women of Sex Tech.
For Ms. Davis, New York’s economic diversity is part of its appeal. “It is refreshing to live in a city where not every single person you meet is in some way, shape or form working in tech,” she said. It also doesn’t hurt that many renowned sex educators live or have lived in New York, from Dr. Ruth Westheimer, who first became famous in the ’80s with her radio show “Sexually Speaking,” to Mal Harrison, founder of the Center for Erotic Intelligence, to Ms. Dodson, who still gives workshops and now offers private sex coaching sessions.
Until the ’70s, most sex toys were made to look like penises. The men who owned the companies that made them “assumed women wanted what they had,” said Dr. Lieberman, the historian. They typically came in “flesh” colors and seemed to be more about penetration than stimulation. Vibrators existed, but were usually marketed as health products rather than sex toys. Female entrepreneurs and sex educators like Ms. Williams and Ms. Dodson were responsible for popularizing toys that stimulated the clitoris and that came in a variety of shapes and colors, innovations that proved popular with women.
Sex toys continued to evolve in the ’80s, when home sales parties made them available to women in rural areas, and the ’90s, when silicone became more popular. Dr. Lieberman explained that at this time, however, most distribution was controlled by one man: Reuben Sturman, a businessman who had branched out to sex toys from pornography. So it was still difficult for women to break into the industry, she said.
Ms. Ruhl cites the influence of shows like “Girls” for its unapologetic dialogue among women and their needs. “Lena Dunham has done a lot to promote a certain kind of openness around women’s bodies,” she said. Sex tech entrepreneurs have also mentioned the famous “Sex and the City” episode from 1998 featuring a “rabbit” vibrator and a more recent “Broad City” episode in which a sex toy plays a central role.
Even if they’re based in New York, though, female sex tech entrepreneurs can face discrimination. Ms. Rodriguez, who became interested in the business after her sex drive decreased at the age of 21 because of radiation treatment for colon cancer, was told by a potential investor that she’d be a good C.E.O. because “you’re not Kim Kardashian-attractive, but you’re girl-next-door attractive,” she recalled. Another asked if she was going to demonstrate her products for him.
Another challenge is raising money. More than 90 percent of partners at the top 100 venture capital firms worldwide are male, and male investors may not understand what kinds of sex products female customers want, said Ms. Galbut, of SoGal. Until last year’s campaign for the Fin, for example, Kickstarter did not accept crowdfunding campaigns for sex toys. “We’ll continue to allow projects like this on a case-by-case basis,” said David Gallagher, a Kickstarter spokesman.
When Ms. Fine applied for a Small Business Administration loan, she was rejected because the agency does not allow loans to companies whose primary products are “of an indecent sexual nature,” she recalled.
“That’s great,” Ms. Fine replied, “because my product is of a decent sexual nature.” The lender was unmoved.
