The Upshot|It’s Not Irrational. It’s Signaling Behavior.
It’s Not Irrational. It’s Signaling Behavior.
Because economists generally assume that people behave rationally, you might expect members of my profession to have been flummoxed by the behavior of many United States senators during the repeated, failed attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act.
After all, many Republican senators voted in favor of their party’s repeal effort after having bitterly denounced it. Senator Lindsey Graham of South Carolina, for example, called one version of the repeal bill a “disaster” and a “fraud.” Several of his colleagues went further, saying they would support the legislation only if Senate leadership could promise that it would never be enacted. Yet Mr. Graham and all but three Republican senators eventually voted for repeal.
Their behavior may seem less puzzling if you are familiar with a 1994 paper by Glenn Loury, now an economics professor at Brown. Building on earlier work by the sociologist Erving Goffman, Mr. Loury’s core insight was that people, especially politicians, often engage in signaling games, which put enormous pressure on them to act in ways that contradict their private beliefs.
Of course, private beliefs are not directly observable. We must try to infer them from what people say and do, and often their beliefs, words and actions aren’t consistent. Economists have found that signaling behavior often helps us resolve the apparent contradictions. The underlying logic of the argument is vividly illustrated by the behavior of politicians faced with votes on controversial issues, like health care, or the death penalty.
In the case of the death penalty, American politicians often want to appear tough on crime, but voters have only imperfect information about what their actual beliefs are. But voters also tend to assume that politicians who are tough on crime are at least somewhat more likely than others to favor the death penalty, and that’s all it takes to launch the dynamic that Mr. Loury and Mr. Goffman described.
The first step in this dynamic is that some politicians who actually oppose the death penalty can be expected instead to declare themselves in favor of it. Those with the best reasons — or, as economists might say, those with the strongest incentives — to take this step are those who most favor harsh measures to combat crime and whose reservations about the death penalty are the least extreme.
When they speak out, the set of those who remain silent becomes smaller and even more heavily weighted toward those who are actually not tough on crime. In the end, the pressure to speak out in favor of the death penalty can become all but irresistible.
Little wonder, then, that even politicians who believe the death penalty to be both ineffective and morally offensive may choose to support it vigorously in public.
The analogy to the recent health care debate is clear. Once a political party’s leadership throws its weight behind a bill, good or bad, a politician’s vote on it becomes an informative signal about whether he or she is faithful to the party’s values. That link is often all it takes to start the signaling game just described. Some Republican senators will conclude that voting against an Obamacare repeal is dangerous, regardless of their own beliefs, since going against the party line could cause many voters to question their faithfulness to conservative principles.
Although this kind of behavior is commonplace, it is not inevitable. In fact, voters often applaud politicians who break out of an expected signaling pattern. For example, when Mario Cuomo, a Democrat, was governor of New York, he repeatedly vetoed death penalty bills that had passed by wide margins in the state legislature. Many voters who favored the death penalty forgave him because they recognized that his opposition was rooted not in an indifference to crime but rather in his widely recognized commitment to Catholic principles.
Similarly, many voters who had been conditioned to view mainland China as a hostile regime that ought to remain isolated were willing to embrace the Republican President Richard Nixon’s overtures to China because his anti-communist credentials were beyond challenge. If former Vice President Hubert Humphrey, a liberal Democrat, had won the presidency, a similar step probably would have been much more difficult.
In short, if politicians’ views are sufficiently transparent to voters, the signaling pressures described by Mr. Loury and Mr. Goffman are often much diminished.
But other factors may also help explain why politicians sometimes buck their party leadership. Because one of a politician’s most pressing concerns is to get re-elected, economic logic suggests it is no coincidence that the three Republican senators whose votes sank the latest Obamacare repeal effort — Lisa Murkowski of Alaska, Susan Collins of Maine and John McCain of Arizona — were among those whose own fortunes were least dependent on party support.
Senator Murkowski, having achieved the wildly improbable feat of holding her seat as a write-in candidate against an opponent who had prevailed in her 2010 Republican primary, may have concluded that she has relatively little to fear from future Republican opposition. Senator Collins, for her part, may be considering a run for her state’s governorship in 2018, an ambition that could be compromised by the repeal effort’s threat to Medicaid, on which Maine relies heavily. And Senator McCain, who has long cherished his reputation as a maverick, is now 80 and may be focusing more on his legacy than on his re-election prospects in 2022.
It is easy to be cynical about Congress. “Laws, like sausages, cease to inspire respect in proportion as we know how they are made,” wrote John Godfrey Saxe, a lawyer and poet, more than a century ago. But important outcomes hinge on the decisions of our lawmakers. A better understanding of what makes them act as they do could help us choose them more wisely.