Q. Game shows used to be filmed almost exclusively in New York. When and why did they move to Los Angeles?
A. Funny you should ask: I recently traveled to Las Vegas to tape an appearance on “Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,” a show that until a few years ago was filmed in New York. Starting with the radio debut of “Truth or Consequences” in 1940, New York was, indeed, the center of the game show universe. In the 1960s, however, productions began moving west to California.
When Dick Clark’s “The $50,000 Pyramid” made the jump in 1981, New York was without a game show to call its own for the first time in more than four decades.
These production companies were driven to relocate mainly by the desire for bigger and flashier sets.
When the game show industry left New York, it took with it an avenue for instant, widespread recognition.
As illustrated by Robert Redford’s Oscar-nominated film “Quiz Show,” which recounted the game show fixing scandal of the late 1950s, one appeal of these early game shows was their casting of regular, everyday people — and the possibility that you, as a regular, everyday person, could find yourself propelled into fame and fortune.
Headhunters patrolled the city streets, looking for colorful people they could recruit as contestants. And who knew what doors such an appearance might open?
Perhaps the best-known example of someone who turned a chance encounter into a productive career was the psychologist Dr. Joyce Brothers, who won the top prize on “The $64,000 Question” by answering questions about the sport of boxing. She soon had a television show of her own.
There were a few reasons for this westward shift, said Adam Nedeff, a producer for several recent shows and a historian of the genre. The chief impetus, he said, could be summed up in a single word: elevators.
If you wanted to, say, place a brand new Chevy Nova onstage at NBC’s Studio 8H, how would you do it? “You’d saw the car in half, take it up piece by piece on the elevator, and put it back together once it gets onstage,” Mr. Nedeff said.
With space so abundant in California, productions could build large warehouses to suit their needs, no elevator required.
