GoDaddy Inc., the web hosting company, severed ties with The Daily Stormer, a neo-Nazi and white supremacy website, after the site posted an article mocking Heather D. Heyer, the 32-year-old woman who was killed when a man drove into a crowd during a rally of white nationalists in Charlottesville, Va., on Saturday.
Dan C. Race, a GoDaddy spokesman, said in an email on Monday that his company had given the site 24 hours to find another domain provider. “Given The Daily Stormer’s latest article comes on the immediate heels of a violent act, we believe this type of article could incite additional violence, which violates our terms of service,” he said.
Later on Monday he confirmed that the transfer of the domain had been completed.
The Daily Stormer later transferred its domain name to Google, according to reports and a screenshot of the registration posted on Twitter. Shortly after, Google announced that it, too, would distance itself from The Daily Stormer. “We are canceling Daily Stormer’s registration with Google Domains for violating our terms of service,” it said in a statement.
Ben Butler, the director of GoDaddy’s digital crimes unit, said in a statement that the company generally did not take action that would constitute censorship. “While we detest the sentiment of such sites, we support a free and open internet and, similar to the principles of free speech, that sometimes means allowing such tasteless, ignorant content,” he said.
The company had been asked in a report in July in The Daily Beast why it did not take action against the site, even after Daily Stormer had published an article promising to “track down” the relatives of CNN staffers. At the time, Ben Butler, GoDaddy’s director of network abuse, cited the First Amendment in defending doing business with the organization.
“While we detest the sentiment of this site and the article in question, we support First Amendment rights and, similar to the principles of free speech, that sometimes means allowing such tasteless, ignorant content,” he told The Daily Beast.
Like other homes for white supremacists on the internet, The Daily Stormer features message boards and sarcastic commentary. It was created by Andrew Anglin in 2013, amid a national uproar over the killing in Florida of Trayvon Martin, an unarmed 17-year-old black teenager, by a neighborhood watch monitor, George Zimmerman.
On Monday, the chief executive officer of Merck, Kenneth C. Frazier, quit an advisory panel over President Trump’s statement blaming “many sides” for the violence in Charlottesville. Mr. Trump criticized Mr. Frazier for the decision.
Also on Monday, Discord, a chat app that allows anonymity, announced that it would delete several accounts associated with the events in Charlottesville. It also deleted an “alt-right” server.
And TIKI Brand, the company that manufactures the torches that were carried by some of the white nationalists on Friday night, slammed the use of its product at the rally. “We do not support their message or the use of our products in this way,” it said in a statement.