London’s police department has reopened its investigation into the unsolved 1987 murder of the Palestinian political cartoonist Naji al-Ali, whose work criticizing Israeli and Arab politics has become iconic in the Middle East in the decades since he was shot outside a newspaper office.
The Metrolitan Police Service appealed for the public’s help on Tuesday, the 30th anniversary of the cartoonist’s shooting death outside a newspaper office in London. The police also released descriptions for two suspects in the case, including an artist’s rendering of what they believe the gunman would look like today.
Mr. Ali, whose work appeared in Arabic-language newspapers, was shot in the back of the neck on July 22, 1987, while on his way to the London office of the Kuwaiti publication Al-Qabas. He was taken to a hospital, where he remained in a coma until his death on Aug. 29, 1987, at the age of 51.
Jonathan Guyer, an expert on Arab comics at the Radcliffe Institute for Advanced Study at Harvard, called Mr. Ali’s artistic influence “unrivaled” and said he remained the most widely read cartoonist in the Arab world 30 years after his death.
Speculation has long centered on a possible political motive for Mr. Ali’s killing, although the many targets of his pen could plausibly cast suspicion on nearly any group in the tangled Middle East conflict.
The police said on Tuesday that Mr. Ali had received “a number of death threats” in the years before he died. But they also said they “remain open-minded” about his killers’ motive.
The police on Tuesday released descriptions of two people involved in the killing. The gunman, they said, was a Middle Eastern-looking man then in his mid-20s. He was seen following Mr. Ali with an automatic handgun before the shooting and fleeing the area afterward.
The second suspect, a middle-aged man of Middle Eastern appearance, was seen leaving the area in a silver Mercedes. The police said they believed he disposed of the murder weapon, a 7.62 Tokarev pistol, which was found two years later at a London housing project. The police do not know the identity of either man.
Mr. Ali’s criticism of both Israeli and Arab governments was shaped by his turbulent life.
He fled his home in the British Mandate of Palestine at the age of 10 during the war that accompanied the creation of Israel. He lived for years in refugee camps in Lebanon and believed that neither Israel nor the Arab states genuinely cared about the plight of the Palestinian people.
His most famous artistic creation was the refugee child Handala, who has become a symbol of the Palestinian cause. The image has appeared on banners, T-shirts and in countless works by other artists.
Mr. Ali drew Handala as a 10-year-old — the same age he was when he became a refugee — and said the character would not grow up until he returned home. “Things will become normal again when the homeland returns,” Mr. Ali wrote.
Handala has never been drawn as an adult.
