THIS TENSION — BETWEEN old and new, rough and smooth — is the aesthetic ethos Van Gend brought to his six-story townhouse in the quiet, tree-lined Brugmann area of Brussels. The 600-square-meter structure was in terrible condition when Van Gend bought it a year and a half ago. He tore through decades of neglect, removing all but a few details: delicate plaster cornices, dramatic guillotine windows and an original marble fireplace the shade of mint-chip ice cream — one of the few shots of color in the whitewashed space.
During the renovation, Van Gend played the role of both architect and interior designer. He modified the poured concrete stairwells, hand-sanding the hard-edged corners to achieve an organic softness. In the entryway, the lower half of the walls are paneled with slabs of foggy Carrara marble, while the upper half are painted with a custom shade of white Van Gend flecked with almost indecipherable traces of blue and red, which he says gives the room a subtle freshness and warmth.
Despite an intense attention to detail, the 1920s house is uncluttered to the point of emptiness. ‘‘To me, an absence of things is peaceful,’’ Van Gend says. With a deft sense of composition, he arranged almost cinematic vignettes with a scarce amount of furniture chosen from a variety of periods: geometric brass sconces by the postwar Belgian designer Jules Wabbes, a square, patinated steel chair by the contemporary designer Franck Robichez and a creamy, undulating sofa by Pierre Paulin, originally manufactured in the late ’60s. When he couldn’t find an armchair to complement the sofa, he designed a swiveling leather captain’s chair upholstered in Kvadrat fabric. He also re-envisioned the room’s intricate floor, polishing the interlocking grid of tiles custom-cut from solid chips of oak into a pale finish.
One of the house’s most arresting spaces is Van Gend’s studio on the ground floor, which opens onto a small, verdant garden — an abundant contrast to the serenity within. Here, the floor is coated in polyurethane tinged in muted cloudy green — similar to the marble of the fireplace — which took Van Gend five attempts to achieve. The centerpiece of the studio is a black drafting desk by Ben Storms, a contemporary Belgian designer, made from a wafer-thin slice of foam topped with a 4-millimeter layer of inky marble.
