On my way home from work two Thursdays ago, the No. 3 train I was riding stopped suddenly, just before the 72nd Street station.
This, on the New York City subway, was not particularly unusual. But what happened afterward was.
Several people gasped. A woman near me jerked her head up from her phone, wearing an expression of horror. We riders did something not normally acceptable: We made eye contact with one another.
A train conductor or operator speaking of a death on the tracks without euphemism: We had never heard that before.
He was speaking with supervisors about how to proceed, the voice continued. There would be major delays. He was very sorry.
Nobody seemed annoyed about waiting. And that was most unusual of all.
The Metropolitan Transportation Authority is not New York’s most popular agency. Fares are rising as service is deteriorating. Search Twitter and you will find legions of frustrated commuters late for work because of train traffic ahead or a sick passenger on board or because the dispatcher said so. Inside the subway cars, delays are greeted with rolled eyes and audible groans.
But not on this day, on this train. And that stems from a policy the M.T.A. adopted in response to a train’s particularly harrowing delay in June: Tell riders the truth.
The New York City subway has always had a code. Delays are explained with stock phrases that may or may not actually apply — “we are delayed because of train traffic ahead of us”; “we are being held momentarily by the train’s dispatcher.” There might be “police activity” or “an investigation,” which are often used to mean someone has been struck by a train. New Yorkers know this perfectly well, but the words have no emotional force.
So the bluntness of “a passenger just jumped in front of the train” did something. This time, what we were experiencing was a human tragedy instead of a personal inconvenience. Someone, a living person who had been standing unhurt on the platform just moments earlier, had been struck mere yards away. Later, news reports would confirm what we had already guessed: The victim had died. And so we did not complain that we were stuck underground in a packed rush-hour subway car.
The specificity was not a one-off, the M.T.A. confirmed, but a new policy: part of a shift from recorded to live announcements.
“We’re rolling it out, and it’s the direction we’re going to go in,” Joseph J. Lhota, the M.T.A.’s new chairman, said through a spokesman.
Examples of the new approach have been popping up on social media and elsewhere over the past two months.
“ ‘And to your left, you’ll see the stalled train causing us to be delayed’- my @MTA conductor, like we’re on a safari” of crumbling infrastructure, one rider wrote on Twitter on July 25.
“A-train conductor at W4: ‘There is a feral cat inside the train, police are trying to remove the cat, when they do, we can move again,’ ” Daniel Roberts, a writer at Yahoo Finance, tweeted during the Thursday morning rush last week, prompting a smattering of that rarest of New York City phenomena: praise for the M.T.A.
Of course, transparent announcements can do only so much to placate riders. The big problem is the delays themselves; whatever the cause, they’re still making you late for work. Mr. Roberts’s A train — sitting in a station, West Fourth Street, served by six other subway lines — quickly emptied after riders were informed about the cat.
Under certain circumstances, though, bluntness can bring what it did nearly two weeks ago: a humanity almost never found on the subway.
Perhaps 10 minutes after the first announcement, the passengers in the first few cars of my train, which were in the station, were allowed to get off. We in the back, still in the tunnel, awaited our turn with a patience that I found remarkable. When the door between our car and the one in front of it slid open another 10 minutes or so later, the scores of us walked through, single-file. No one jostled. No one spoke. We stepped carefully over the gaps between cars, holding the doors for the people behind us.
