An image from Occupy Democrats, a left-wing Facebook page.
As TV, radio and newspapers give way to the megaphonic power of social media, today’s donor class is throwing its weight behind a new group of partisan organizations that specialize in creating catchy, highly shareable messages for Facebook, Twitter and other social platforms. Viral media expertise is emerging as a crucial skill for political operatives, and as donors look to replicate the success of the social media sloganeers who helped lift President Trump to victory, they’re seeking out talented meme makers.
You’ve probably seen these groups on your news feed. Some have grandiose-sounding names like Occupy Democrats and The Other 98%. Others, such as Milo Inc., the media outfit built around the alt-right provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos, are outgrowths of a single internet personality. Their output and tone vary, but typically include a steady stream of aggregated links, captioned images and short videos. All of this gets thrust in front of a social media audience, in the hope that something will catch fire, change skeptical minds or incite real-world action.
Stand Up America, a new progressive outfit run by Sean Eldridge, the husband of the Facebook co-founder Chris Hughes, is emblematic of the union between big-money donors and social media organizing. Mr. Eldridge, who unsuccessfully ran for Congress as a Democrat in 2014, started a Facebook page in the week after Hillary Clinton’s defeat, and began writing posts and linking to anti-Trump stories.
That page quickly grew to have 1.1 million followers, and has expanded beyond graphics and news stories to include efforts like a Facebook bot that helped more than 100,000 users send faxes to their representatives. For Mr. Eldridge, the return on investment has been shockingly high.
An image from Milo Inc., a media outfit built around the alt-right provocateur Milo Yiannopoulos.
“We’ve spent in the low six figures to reach, on average, 10 million people a week,” he said.
Nimble America has since folded, according to a representative who responded to an email sent to the group.
Wealthy donors aren’t newcomers to partisan media start-ups. The Huffington Post was conceived after John Kerry’s loss to George W. Bush in the 2004 presidential election, and was supported at its outset by a slate of Democratic boosters including Arianna Huffington and the venture capitalist Kenneth Lerer. The Daily Caller, a conservative web publication, got its start in 2010 with $3 million in funding from the Republican megadonor Foster Friess.
What distinguishes the current wave of donors is a focus on social media — Facebook in particular — and a willingness to fund newcomers without ties to the media establishment.
John Sellers, a left-wing organizer and former Greenpeace activist, started a Facebook page called The Other 98% several years ago to promote his views on environmentalism, corporate greed and other progressive causes. The page has five million followers, and its nonprofit affiliate has received funding from donors including Open Society Foundations, a group backed by the progressive billionaire George Soros.
Civic Ventures, an organization founded by the Seattle venture capitalist Nick Hanauer, has paid partnerships with several popular left-wing Facebook pages, including The Other 98% and Occupy Democrats.
Zach Silk, the president of Civic Ventures, credited these pages with building support for some of the organization’s key issues, including the “Fight for 15” movement, in which fast-food workers advocated a higher minimum wage.
An image from Milo Inc.
While some social publishers are structured as nonprofits, many are for-profit businesses that more closely resemble internet start-ups. Milo Inc., which has nearly 20 employees cranking out content for Mr. Yiannopoulos’s 2.2 million Facebook fans, claims to have raised $12 million from a group of investors in order to “cultivate an entire next generation” of conservative internet personalities.
Conservatives, it is generally acknowledged, have so far had the upper hand in the viral content wars. Mr. Trump spent many millions less than his opponents did on traditional TV advertising, but benefited from an army of amateur creators who flooded social media with pro-Trump messages.
The edgy, boundary-crossing humor beloved by the “memelords” who fill Reddit and 4 Chan was a natural fit for the Trump campaign’s loose-cannon messaging style, and it worked. According to a study by researchers at the University of Edinburgh, who analyzed high-performing social media posts during the final two months of the campaign, nearly two-thirds of the most popular election tweets were either anti-Clinton or pro-Trump.
Now, some Democrats are hoping to close that gap by building their own viral content studios. Reid Hoffman, a co-founder of LinkedIn, and Mark Pincus, a co-founder of Zynga, announced this year that they had spent $500,000 to establish a group called Win the Future, which would, among other things, allow users to vote for popular user-generated messages to be turned into real-life billboards in Washington.
Donor funding is no guarantee of success for partisan publishers — as with all viral internet content, there are limits to what money can buy. But given the outcome of the presidential election, Democrats may have no other choice than to enter the meme wars.
