For decades, legislation to require prosecutors to turn over evidence earlier has run into stiff opposition from New York’s district attorneys, who present a powerful counterargument: the safety of witnesses. More than a dozen such bills have failed in the past quarter-century.
Even in New York, some prosecutors already go beyond what the law requires. The Brooklyn district attorney’s office has long provided open and early discovery in most cases. The acting district attorney, Eric Gonzalez, said his office sometimes sought protective orders to shield vulnerable witnesses or, more rarely, to relocate them.
“We’ve been able to find the right balance in how to keep our witnesses safe and also make sure the process is as transparent and open as possible,” Mr. Gonzalez said.
Prosecutors describe frightening encounters between the accused and witnesses and warn of violence in a “no snitching” culture intensified by social media. Prosecutors say the current law helps protect witnesses by allowing them to withhold witness information indefinitely, since so few cases go to trial.
Jack Ryan, the chief assistant district attorney in the Queens district attorney’s office, recalled a recent case in which a witness was photographed on his way into the courthouse.
Mr. Cedres and his lawyer, Kristin Bruan, said that at first he had refused the plea deal, but that as the months had worn on, he had begun to consider it. Pending felony charges meant that he lost his job, then his apartment and car. His girlfriend moved into her mother’s house with the couple’s infant daughter, and Mr. Cedres was homeless.
“Without that video, our guy was going to prison,” said Ms. Bruan, a staff attorney with the Legal Aid Society.
The judge who presided over a later stage of Mr. Cedres’s case, Troy K. Webber, said a judge could have ordered the video tossed out of the case. But that would have wrongly punished the defense, she said in an interview.
“You have to hope the people will turn over the video,” said Justice Webber, who now sits on a state appellate court.
More than two months after Ms. Bruan’s initial request, the prosecutor wrote that the video “does not show anything/is corrupted,” an email shows. Ms. Bruan pushed back, and after five more months of wrangling, the videos appeared in her inbox.
They showed almost exactly what Mr. Cedres had said they would: In the mayhem, he threw two punches to free the club owner’s son from a bear hug. A separate fight spilled down the street, where a crowd of people beat the man who was ultimately seriously injured. After a year and a half and 22 court appearances, the charges were dismissed.
Patrice O’Shaughnessy, a spokeswoman for the Bronx district attorney’s office, declined to comment on the case.
“I’m getting little things back, but I shouldn’t have lost it to begin with,” Mr. Cedres said.
Kimberly Overton, a prosecutor who runs training programs for the North Carolina Conference of District Attorneys, said a 2004 state law requiring prosecutors there to turn over most of their files automatically very early in a case helped to clear up any potential ambiguity over Brady material. “There is no decision for a prosecutor to make now,” she said.
While Brooklyn has a more open policy, the Queens district attorney’s office will negotiate pleas only before a grand jury indictment, a point when the law requires no discovery at all — and sometimes before there is time to thoroughly examine the evidence it has.
“We disclose what we need to disclose,” Mr. Ryan said.
More than a dozen defense lawyers and judges who practice in Manhattan said the district’s attorney’s office there hewed closely to the restrictive state law. Even the name of the accuser is routinely withheld until the eve of trial, they said.
In late May, Mr. Vance’s office announced a new policy to provide discovery at arraignment in some felony cases when the main witness is a police officer.
“When serious lawyers understand they’re dealing with serious lawyers on the other side, that usually leads to a level of trust that accelerates discovery,” Mr. Vance said.
Mr. Jones’s memory of the night was blurred by alcohol, but he did not view the crime as serious. He refused, and was sent to Rikers Island.
Because of Brooklyn’s discovery policy, three months after his arrest Mr. Jones was able to read the grand jury testimony of an employee who recognized him from surveillance videos. He saw himself on tape, rummaging through coolers and slurring his words.
James Yates, who in 1979 helped draft New York’s current discovery law as a young Assembly staff member and who went on to serve more than 18 years as a state judge, said he believed the law had been “abused, twisted and turned” to withhold information.
If the law changes, “we’re going to see a huge increase in crime because no one’s going to cooperate,” said Scott McNamara, the district attorney of Oneida County and the president-elect of the state district attorneys association, which has opposed changes to New York’s discovery rules.
“What the defendant may not know is the strength of the prosecution’s case, and therefore how likely it is that he can ‘beat’ the charges despite his guilt,” wrote three prosecutors who dissented from the state bar association report.
When the police arrived, he kicked and flailed, according to court documents. A police captain later said Mr. Spry had tried to wrest an officer’s gun from his holster.
“I knew I was innocent, but I didn’t know what they had against me,” he said.
The judge, Justice Gregory Carro of the State Supreme Court in Manhattan, confirmed Mr. Bickel’s account but declined to comment further. A spokeswoman for the Manhattan district attorney’s office declined to comment on the case.
