LONDON — World leaders expressed alarm on Friday at the bellicose language emanating from North Korea and the United States, but also some support for President Trump, as they sought to allay their citizens’ fears of a nuclear war on the Korean Peninsula.
Among America’s allies, Australia was perhaps the most decisive in denouncing North Korea’s weapons program.
European leaders, whose summer holidays had already been interrupted by political uncertainty, and who are usually occupied by the threat from a resurgent Russia, were focused on the Korean Peninsula.
Ms. Merkel said diplomacy offered the only way out of the crisis. She did not single out Mr. Trump — with whom she has had a frosty relationship — for criticism, but she made clear that his language was not helpful.
“Germany will be intensively involved in any possible nonmilitary solutions, but I consider an escalation of words to be the wrong answer,” she said.
Russia’s Defense Ministry on Friday denied reports on state-controlled media that air defense units in the Russian Far East had been placed on high alert. Russia shares a short border with North Korea, near Vladivostok, a Pacific port city.
Speaking at a youth forum east of Moscow, Mr. Lavrov, the foreign minister, said Moscow was “very worried” by fiery declarations in Washington and Pyongyang.
“Talk of the need to carry out a pre-emptive strike at North Korea, Pyongyang’s talk of the need to strike at Guam island at the U.S. military base, this has been continual, and we are very worried by this,” Mr. Lavrov said.
He said that Russia, which last weekend joined the United States and China in voting at the United Nations Security Council for severe new sanctions against Pyongyang, did not accept North Korea as a nuclear power. But he said it was up to the United States, as the more powerful country, to take the first step.
Russian experts worry that while the United States is unlikely to launch an all-out military attack on North Korea, it could make a limited strike. This, warned Vladimir I. Batyuk, of the Institute for U.S. and Canadian Studies in Moscow, would shatter the united front that Russia, China and the United States displayed in the sanctions vote at the United Nations.
“If the Americans apply military force against the D.P.R.K., they will clearly lose whatever political support Moscow and Beijing have provided so far for U.S. policy toward North Korea,” Mr. Batyuk told Kommersant, a Russian newspaper, using the initials for the Democratic People’s Republic of Korea, the formal name of the North.
Writing in Republic, an online Russian journal, Mr. Frolov complained that Moscow was engaged in “geopolitical outsourcing,” leaving China and the United States to calm a grave danger on its own border. The approach “works for now, but is not a very good look for the Russian leadership,” he said.
The leaders of France, America’s oldest ally, and Britain, America’s closest ally, did not offer fresh comments on the tensions, but Jeremy Corbyn, the far-left leader of the opposition Labour Party in Britain, said war would be catastrophic.
Several allies of the United States, while expressing dismay about the heated language, said Washington was correct to condemn North Korea’s weapons program.
New Zealand’s foreign minister, Gerry Brownlee, re-emphasized the need for a strong diplomatic response, saying any pre-emptive action would be a mistake.
“Committing to an aggressive response now — while encouraging all involved to avoid escalation — is not a position we want to take,” Mr. Brownlee said, according to local reports.
Tom Plant, director of proliferation and nuclear policy at the Royal United Services Institute for Defence and Security Studies, said European experts would generally agree that “a diplomatic resolution is the only feasible and sensible resolution” to the tensions.
Mr. Plant said he hoped that, behind the scenes, diplomats from the two sides were meeting in private to defuse the crisis.
“There are still very competent people in the State Department and in the White House capable of suggesting and conducting that course of action,” Mr. Plant said, adding that he was not confident that Mr. Trump himself would pursue such a course.
Tom Tugendhat, a former British military officer and the new head of the Commons Foreign Affairs Committee, compared the situation to the Cuban missile crisis of 1962.
