WASHINGTON — A few thousand American troops to train the Afghan Army. A single-minded focus on counterterrorism, with C.I.A. drones and Special Operations units hunting down terrorists. A healthy skepticism of Pakistan as an abettor of Islamic extremism. And an explicit repudiation of grand plans to nurture a Jeffersonian democracy in Central Asia.
These are the hallmarks of the Afghanistan strategy President Trump set out on Monday night. They are also the hallmarks of the strategy former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. tried unsuccessfully to sell to President Barack Obama in the fall of 2009.
The parallels between Mr. Trump’s and Mr. Biden’s plans provided a sense of irony — even comfort — for the Washington foreign policy establishment, which has felt deeply alienated during this presidency, watching Mr. Trump’s unorthodox statecraft with a mix of horror and dismay.
But the similarities are more than a historical footnote: Mr. Biden has talked about running for president in 2020, and he would start off as a front-runner in a splintered Democratic field. If Mr. Biden were to run, he would no doubt make his foreign policy credentials, and Mr. Trump’s haphazard debut on the global stage, a major theme of his campaign.
Now that Mr. Trump has embraced Mr. Biden’s plan for Afghanistan, he has blurred a line between him and Mr. Obama’s No. 2, as well as with the foreign policy establishment Mr. Trump ran against in 2016.
Mr. Biden was viewed as an outlier during the Obama administration’s first troop debate on Afghanistan. Other officials favored a more ambitious counterinsurgency strategy that required large numbers of troops, with a broader mission to help the Afghans not only secure their cities, but also develop durable public institutions.
In warning against that approach, Mr. Biden essentially played devil’s advocate to a united front of Robert M. Gates, the defense secretary; David H. Petraeus, then the commander of Central Command; and Secretary of State Hillary Clinton. Mr. Biden’s points appealed to Mr. Obama, who had his own doubts about the odds of transforming Afghanistan.
But ultimately, he sided with his military commanders in authorizing a broader mission, though he insisted on a time limit for starting to withdraw the troops — a proviso Mr. Trump fiercely criticized on Monday, saying it allowed the Taliban simply to wait out the Americans.
The setbacks of the past eight years have largely vindicated Mr. Biden. The Obama administration quickly gave up its grandest dreams for Afghanistan, with some rebranding the policy as “Afghan good enough.” By the end of his presidency, Mr. Obama reluctantly agreed to leave close to 10,000 troops in the country to conduct missions not unlike what Mr. Trump described.
On Monday night, Mr. Trump made arguments that Mr. Biden could have made in the Situation Room in October 2009. Afghanistan was not about to become a laboratory for American-style democracy.
Mr. Trump said, “We are not nation-building again; we are killing terrorists.” He used far more bellicose language than Mr. Biden. “These killers need to know they have nowhere to hide,” he said. And he clothed the strategy in an ideology of total victory that Mr. Biden, who defined the mission as protecting the American homeland from terrorist attacks originating in Afghanistan, avoided.
Mr. Trump shares Mr. Biden’s skepticism about the reliability of Pakistan as an ally in fighting extremism. But where the former vice president invested heavily in diplomacy, Mr. Trump issued a blunt warning to Pakistan that it faced penalties — not least in terms of lost American aid — if it did not do better in eliminating sanctuaries for extremists.
There are more than differences in tone between Mr. Trump and Mr. Biden. The president spoke of giving Afghans tools to develop their economy, something Mr. Biden did not. He even suggested that this could defray the cost of the American mission there — a reference, officials said, to his hope that the United States could profit from extracting the country’s valuable minerals.
