Today’s introduction comes from Thomas Fuller, our San Francisco bureau chief.
Tensions were high in the days leading up to a pair of right wing rallies planned in the San Francisco Bay Area over the weekend.
Hundreds of law enforcement officers were placed on duty in hopes of avoiding a replay of the violence that unfolded this month in Charlottesville, Va.
But at the last moment, both events seemed uncertain — a “No to Marxism in America” rally in Berkeley was denied a permit by the city and a “Freedom Rally” in San Francisco was canceled by its organizer, who cited fears of violence.
That didn’t stop a number of planned counterprotests, which by then had a momentum of their own.
Largely peaceful demonstrations in San Francisco — including the formation of a giant heart on the beach — contrasted with chaotic scenes in Berkeley, where the mayor, Jesse Arreguin, had urged residents to gather on the streets to show their rejection of bigotry and white supremacy.
The crowd included a large group of black-clad antifa adherents, who believe that physical confrontation is a necessary and effective means of combating neo Nazis. There were also church groups, U.C. Berkeley students and Berkeley residents who carried signs denouncing hate.
The protests were at times festive and at other times tense. The counterdemonstrators far outnumbered a small number of right-wing protesters.
Trump supporters and people associated with the far-right were at times surrounded and chased away. It was mob rule with occasional intervention by police officers.
Johnny Benitez, a protester who flew from Southern California and who described himself as a “Second Amendment-exercising, freedom-loving, proud American” on his Twitter page, had to be escorted to a car by a phalanx of police officers as counterprotesters hounded him.
A number of scuffles broke out between antifa protesters, who carried anarchist flags, and those they perceived to be on the right.
By midafternoon, with the crowds dispersed, the Berkeley police had made at least 13 arrests.
• California lawmakers are holding town halls this week: Representative Karen Bass in Culver City on Tuesday; Senator Kamala Harris in Oakland on Wednesday; Representative Jackie Speier in San Francisco on Wednesday, and Representative Mike Thompson in Crockett on Friday.
• Rides, farm animals and funnel cake — the L.A. County Fair kicks off in Pomona on Friday and continues through Sept. 24.
• The clans will gather and the caber will be tossed at the Scottish Highland Gathering and Games in Pleasanton on Saturday and Sunday.
California has been enjoying something of a public mural boom.
Over the last five years, Los Angeles, Santa Monica and Sacramento, among other cities, have each transformed dozens of formerly drab outdoor walls with colorful artworks.
Evan Meyer, the founder of Beautify Earth, a nonprofit that promotes public murals, attributed the movement in part to a growing appreciation for murals as an antidote to blight.
Public art, he said, represents a win not just for the artist and the community, but also for the property owner that provides the canvas.
This month, the historic Warner Grand Theater in San Pedro added a playful scene depicting underwater musicians to one of its exterior walls.
The artist, Kent Yoshimura, said he was fascinated by the idea that, in contrast to a gallery setting, countless passers-by would encounter the mural. At 111-feet by 55-feet, it can be seen from several blocks away.
