For all the technological sophistication of the New York Police Department, in some respects it remains a collection of bureaucratic fiefs: 77 police precincts, their borders dating back decades, run by commanders who answer for crime within those lines.
But criminals tend to stray. And so at a CompStat meeting on a Thursday morning in July, when Brooklyn commanders showed top police officials a series of commercial burglary sprees that, curiously, never crossed precinct boundary lines, the department’s chief of crime control strategies, Dermot Shea, was skeptical.
In a bid to seed station houses with the computerized analytical skills that are increasingly prevalent at department headquarters, and to force precincts to think creatively about crime data within and beyond their borders, the Police Department is in the midst of hiring 100 civilian crime analysts for commands across the city.
The department’s goal is to wrest out of the analog era a job that has long been weighted down by rote data entry. The civilians, many of whom Chief Shea said had a combination of law enforcement and math and statistics backgrounds, will be expected to find crime patterns before they grow too large and to make the department’s vast amounts of crime data easier to decipher.
They will also report directly to Chief Shea’s office, along with the uniformed officer and sergeant on the crime analysis team, partly insulating them from the more local pressures that crime analysis teams had previously worked under when they answered to the precinct’s commanding officer.
The program represents the latest step by the administration of Commissioner James P. O’Neill to try to open up the regimented world of station houses by bringing in civilian employees and victims’ advocates, for example.
The city’s Independent Budget Office has pointed out in the past that the department was slow to hire civilians, effectively tying up officers who would otherwise do crime-fighting work.
There is evidence that integrating civilian analysts can be one part of helping the police solve more crimes. The Boston Police Department, for example, which had long solved homicides at a rate below the national average, was shown to have improved its clearance rate by assigning more detectives to the homicide unit, standardizing procedures and forensic reviews and hiring a civilian crime analyst, according to a 2016 study.
In New York City, technical know-how has advanced more slowly on the front lines of investigative work than it has at Police Headquarters and in counterterrorism units.
Chief Shea said the civilian analyst program was an attempt to make the questions asked at Police Headquarters — about crime patterns, or how a suspect in one shooting is connected to another crime — a routine part of a precinct’s police work.
The first 30 crime analysts completed three weeks of training in the department’s computer systems and data at the Police Academy in recent weeks and were dispatched to station houses. The department has already interviewed other potential hires, and Chief Shea said he expected the department to hire the full complement within three months. Beyond those stationed in precincts, the analysts will be sent to boroughwide or specialty offices.
For a long time, crime analysis teams — several uniformed officers and a sergeant — manually sorted data. When a commander asked how many crime complaints came from so-called impact zones, for example, the team would make a database, just as they would when a commander asked about crime on and off public housing property, Chief Shea said.
The program is bound to create some friction. Chief Shea said the analysts will have to learn to operate within a precinct’s hierarchy: how to send findings up the chain of command, for example, and even how to ask for days off without upsetting a precinct supervisor. But Chief Shea, himself a former precinct commanding officer in the Bronx, said he expected supervisors to adapt so long as the analysts made their jobs easier.
The civilian analysts will be paid from $51,000 to $90,000 annually, creating savings in many cases compared with uniformed crime analysts. The city sometimes struggles to lure specialists in data analysis and technology from more lucrative jobs. In this case, some applicants backed out after showing interest, but many of the hires had law enforcement experience, which Chief Shea said he saw as an opportunity to learn from the practices of other agencies.