History is littered with the shattered remains of toppled statues, and more are toppling now in the American South.
A violent rally this weekend in Charlottesville, Va., centered in part on the city’s plan to relocate a statue of the Confederate Gen. Robert E. Lee. A memorial to Confederate soldiers in Durham, N.C., was pulled down by protesters on Monday. Four Confederate monuments were taken down by the city of Baltimore on Wednesday; New Orleans did the same earlier this year.
But stiff opposition remains. Debates are raging over whether the statues should fall because they commemorate those who fought to uphold slavery, or stand because they remind us of a history that cannot be erased.
The United States has been dismantling statues since its very foundation.
One of the earliest recorded instances came in 1776, just five days after the Declaration of Independence was ratified. In a moment that was immortalized in a mid-19th-century painting, soldiers and civilians tore down a gilded statue of Britain’s King George III in Manhattan.
That dismantling was more than symbolic. The leaden king was to be repurposed “to make musket balls, so that his troops will probably have melted Majesty fired at them,” during the Revolutionary War, said a letter from Ebenezer Hazard, New York’s postmaster, to Gen. Horatio Gates.
Globally, iconoclasm has been practiced at least since ancient times. Instances were recorded in the Bible. Medieval Christians smashed sculptures of Ancient Rome. Spanish conquerors destroyed temples of the Aztecs and the Incas.
More recently, in 2001, the Taliban destroyed giant statues of the Buddha in central Afghanistan. And this year, Islamic State militants toppled ancient structures in the historic city of Palmyra, Syria.
Symbols — including flags and portraits — of reviled leaders like World War II Germany’s Adolf Hitler were destroyed after a fall from power.
And monuments seen as symbols of European colonialism have been torn down in several countries. In Cape Town, South Africa, a statue of the imperialist businessman Cecil John Rhodes was dismantled in 2015. In Caracas, Venezuela, a monument to Christopher Columbus, who claimed the land for Spain during the 1400s, was toppled in 2004.
These acts of destruction can function as propaganda. What else could signify a smashing victory — or a new and brilliant future — so succinctly as the likeness of a vanquished leader, smashed to rubble on the ground?
But propaganda built around individuals can be misleading.
“Making sculptures into public monuments conveys the idea that history is made by individuals. We have a very individualized sense of personal agency and activism today,” said Lucia Allais, a Princeton historian writing a book about the destruction and preservation of monuments in the 20th Century.
One of the best-known topplings of a statue in modern history might be the 2003 dismantling of a bronze Saddam Hussein in Baghdad during the American invasion of Iraq.
At the time, many of the media reports from the scene told a story of a giant statue felled by jubilant Iraqis.
But later accounts told a more nuanced story. Peter Maass, a journalist for The New York Times Magazine who saw the statue fall, wrote in a 2011 ProPublica article, published with The New Yorker, that U.S. Marines who were present helped drag the statue down, in part, because they understood the mass appeal of such an image. He did not personally see it as a defining moment, and he added that the square was less crowded, and the Iraqis present less enthusiastic, than it had appeared in many photographs and live broadcasts from the scene.
Mr. Hussein was captured in December 2003 and executed three years later. But the country has yet to emerge from years of conflict.
Broken statues and torn portraits figured prominently years later in the Arab Spring. They did not herald peaceful change.
In January 2011, protesters ripped through a portrait of Egypt’s then-President Hosni Mubarak in the northern city of Alexandria as revolts rocked the country. Weeks later, Mr. Mubarak stepped down. His elected predecessor, Mohammed Morsi, lasted a year before his own ouster.
In August 2011, Libyan protesters overran the compound of Muammar el-Qaddafi in Tripoli, dismantling the head of a statue in his likeness, and toppling an iconic statue of a golden fist crushing a fighter plane. Mr. Qaddafi was killed two months later, but Libya still suffers from conflict and political chaos.
Syrian protesters dismantled a statue of Hafez al-Assad, the father of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad, in the city of Raqqa in 2013. But Islamic State fighters soon assumed control of that city, and President Assad remains in office.
Statues of Soviet leaders have been toppled, too.
One towering likeness of Joseph Stalin came down in Budapest as early as 1956, during the Hungarian Revolution against Soviet control. Pieces the statue were attacked in the streets, but protesters couldn’t dismantle it all. They left a pair of Mr. Stalin’s boots stuck in its old perch high above the City Park.
Those boots finally came down, under the cover of night, a few days after Soviet troops had crushed the rebellion.
Statues of Vladimir Lenin have been erected across continents. But many were removed, in countries including Romania, Uzbekistan and Ethiopia, around the time of the Soviet bloc’s collapse.
Still others were dismantled in Ukraine during the more recent Euromaidan protests — including one large structure in the capital city of Kiev in December 2013 — and the continuing conflict between Ukrainian troops and Russian-backed separatists.
In the United States, debates over Confederate symbols have been heating up for years, spurred in part by a series of high-profile police shootings of black civilians.
Another turning point came when Dylann Roof, a white supremacist with an affinity for the Confederate battle flag, killed nine black parishioners in a June 2015 church shooting in Charleston, S.C. Ten days later, an activist, Bree Newsome, climbed a 30-foot flagpole that was flying the Confederate battle flag, removing the banner herself.
About two weeks after that, South Carolina officially removed the flag from the State Capitol.
What becomes of these monuments, flags and portraits after they are removed from public spaces?
In Venezuela, the toppled statue of Christopher Columbus in Caracas was replaced by a likeness of Guaicaipuro, an indigenous chief who resisted Spanish conquerors. In Libya, the golden fist that was once in Mr. Qaddafi’s compound in Tripoli was moved to a museum in Misurata. In Ukraine, the thousands of Lenin statues dismantled in recent years have met all manner of fates; some have been painted over, others smashed to pieces, and still others stored in basements.
