“Blown canes.” Those were his first words to mark me. Like any true discovery, they came tangled in myth. I was about 16, a sixth former at Titchfield, my high school on a peninsula in Port Antonio, a town on the northeastern coast of Jamaica. Almost daily, for my last thing after school, I went to the town’s library. Once inside, I was at sea, isolated, but not alone.
The myth of evening: porous light aslant a single bookshelf labeled West Indian Literature. Was it new? I had never, impossibly, seen it before. I picked up the first book at hand, the soft-covered, fading Caribbean Writers Series Heinemann of Derek Walcott’s “Selected Poetry,” edited by Wayne Brown, a Trinidadian poet and critic. I opened to the lines, “Where you are rigidly anchored, / the groundswell of blue foothills, the blown canes.” A sort of force triggered in me at “blown canes” that fogged my eyes. I stood, rigidly anchored. West Indian literature had arrived on two words.
Blown canes. The force was partly because what I saw I heard — canes blowing in the breeze, their flags flowing backward like waves. But that pastoral presence, in the rhythm of the words, also quickened the Caribbean’s most brutal historical pain into the present. In them I felt the stressed aftermath of plantation slavery.
The shock was immediate and oppressive. Every time I repeated them under my breath, the blade swish of “s” on “cane,” slashed my tongue. But I couldn’t stop repeating blown canes, blown canes until I was home, in pitch dark. How can a poet do that, reveal with the stroke of two words, instantaneously, the horrors concealed in the canes, the sea? Here was the cadence of experience, language pitched from the marrow of the world around me.
these were the only epics: the leaves.
A strike against English-borns! Nonetheless belated, as Graves only reiterated what many of Walcott’s Caribbean-born contemporaries had been saying since Walcott self-published his first book, “25 Poems,” at age 18 in 1948. Radically more belated than Graves is the interesting — though not so surprising — case of V. S. Naipaul, who in an essay on his encounter with Walcott’s first volume (while Naipaul was at school in Trinidad), confesses: “Fifty years on, I see more than I did in 1955.” Well, yes. He sees and praises the miracle of his contemporary.
I loved you alone and I loved the whole world.
What does it matter that our lives are different?
Burdened with the loves of our different children?
and your voice that chuckles in the slap of the sea?
you whom I loved first: my poetry.
Blown tribes. Schoolchildren in uniform, market people, the posh dignitaries, friends from distant countries, daughters, granddaughters, even the wandering tourists — they were all there, the disparate tribes all gathered on the day of his funeral. Where else? Everywhere else. In every nook of private homes pierced by his poetry.
The day of his funeral I didn’t see the crowds. From my winter outpost in Ithaca, N.Y., an “accident” happened that felt like its own ceremony of farewell. I knew the moment his funeral was going on and I wanted to be in his poetry, in Caribbean light. I went into my study and took down “White Egrets,” his most valedictory book, and a battered, unremembered copy of Thomas Hardy’s last, posthumous collection, “Winter Words,” fell from the shelves to the floor.
The two books lay next to each other, companions in serenity. For companions they were, in literature as in life. Both lived and wrote vigorously into old age. Both died at age 87. Walcott adored Hardy with a vigilant esteem. Lines of Hardy came to serve as the epigraph — “Down their carved names / the raindrops plough” — to Chapter 20 of “Another Life,” the most moving of Walcott’s autobiographical work.
Blown leaves. Blown canes. Blown tribes. I left both books on the floor, closed the door of my study, and climbed the stairs in Caribbean light.