BRIDGEWATER, N.J. — White House officials, under siege over President Trump’s reluctance to condemn white supremacists for the weekend’s bloody rallies in Charlottesville, Va., tried to clarify his comments on Sunday, as critics in both parties intensified demands that he adopt a stronger, more unifying message.
A statement on Sunday — issued more than 36 hours after the protests began — condemned “white supremacists” for the violence that led to one death. It came in an email sent to reporters in the president’s traveling press pool, and was attributed to an unnamed representative.
The email was sent “in response” to questions about Mr. Trump’s remarks, in which he blamed the unrest “on many sides” while speaking on Saturday before an event for military veterans at his golf resort in Bedminster, N.J., where the president is on vacation.
Mr. Trump’s high-volume outbursts on issues petty and profound have become a defining feature of his presidency. But his quiescence on the violence in Charlottesville has had, in many ways, a more profound and unsettling effect.
The president’s reluctance to speak out with force and moral indignation against the white nationalists who incited the most serious racial episode of his presidency elicited deep feelings of disappointment spanning the ideological spectrum, and a spreading sense that he had squandered a critical opportunity to empathize, unite and move beyond the acrimony that has engulfed the White House and country.
“I think what you saw here was a real moment in our nation for our leaders to deal with this moral issue as one country, as people all over the world watched,” Gov. Terry McAuliffe of Virginia said, speaking on a cellphone outside the home of one of the two state troopers killed in a helicopter crash monitoring the melee on Saturday.
Gov. John Kasich of Ohio, a Republican and a frequent critic of Mr. Trump, cautioned against reading too much into the president’s initial response but called for the White House to use the episode as an opportunity to convene “a national discussion” on race, prejudice and community policing.
The criticism of Mr. Trump intensified on Sunday, with lawmakers from both parties calling on him to explicitly condemn the role of white racists and agitators affiliated with the fringe movement known as the alt-right, some of whom brandished pro-Trump banners and campaign placards during violent protests over the removal of a Robert E. Lee statue from a Charlottesville park.
Mr. Trump will continue to receive regular updates from his team, according to the official to whom the statement was attributed, and Thomas P. Bossert, the White House Homeland Security adviser, was in Bedminster monitoring the situation.
As the White House shifted its message, the Justice Department opened a hate crimes inquiry into the violence, which included the death of a 32-year-old woman.
Attorney General Jeff Sessions was pressed during his confirmation hearings early this year about how he might handle such a case, and many on Sunday said they saw the Charlottesville investigation as a test for him.
It was unclear on Sunday what the specific scope of the investigation was. A spokesman for the department declined to comment beyond a statement released late Saturday that had cited the cooperation of the F.B.I. field office in Richmond, Va.; the United States Attorney’s Office for the Western District of Virginia; and the Justice Department’s civil rights division.
“It’s a test for Attorney General Sessions in that he has put such a premium on cracking down on violence in cities and violent offenders, and obviously during his confirmation there were issues raised about equal justice under law,” said John P. Fishwick, a former United States attorney for the Western District of Virginia during the Obama administration.
Administration officials largely appeared to avoid branding the car rampage as domestic terrorism, but some experts said it certainly could meet the legal standard.
Mr. Trump consulted a broad range of advisers before speaking on Saturday, most of whom told him to sharply criticize the white nationalist protesters.
At the center of the discussion was Mr. Bossert, who laid out the situation on the ground, including a description of provocations by both protesters and counterprotesters, according to a White House official.
Two hard-edge economic populists — Stephen K. Bannon, the president’s chief strategist, and Stephen Miller, a senior adviser — spoke with Mr. Trump repeatedly on Saturday, the person said, although it was not clear if Mr. Bannon had offered him advice on his comments.
Mr. Trump listened attentively, according to another person familiar with the discussions, but repeatedly steered the conversation to the breakdown of “law and order,” and the responsibility of local officials to stem the violence.
Mr. Bossert, in an interview Sunday on CNN’s “State of the Union,” dismissed any suggestion that the president had failed to adequately condemn white supremacists.
As the gravity of the events on Saturday became clearer, the pressure on Mr. Trump to make a stronger statement came from his innermost circle of advisers and family.
“With the moral authority of the presidency, you have to call that stuff out,” Anthony Scaramucci, an ally of Mr. Trump’s who served briefly as White House communications director last month, told George Stephanopoulos of ABC’s “This Week” on Sunday.
Still, the tone and tenor of the president’s comments on Saturday — noticeably less fiery than what he has had to say on Twitter and in public settings about the North Korean leader, Kim Jong-un, and the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell — reflected Mr. Trump’s own thinking.
And the episode again proved the limitations of Mr. Trump’s family, which was once expected to exert a moderating influence on his presidency.
Ivanka Trump, a senior adviser to her father, used Twitter early Sunday to denounce the violence in Charlottesville, becoming the highest-ranking administration official to condemn the protesters on the record.
“There should be no place in society for racism, white supremacy and neo-nazis,” she wrote Sunday.