It began with calls to remove Confederate generals.
But since the violence in Charlottesville, Va., two weeks ago, the anger from the left over monuments and public images deemed racist, insensitive or inappropriate has quickly spread to statues of Christopher Columbus and the former Philadelphia tough cop mayor Frank Rizzo, Boston’s landmark Faneuil Hall, a popular Chicago thoroughfare and even Maryland’s state song. An Asian-American sportscaster named Robert Lee was pulled from broadcasting a University of Virginia football game.
The disputes over America’s racial past and public symbols have proliferated with dizzying speed, spreading to states far beyond the Confederacy and inspiring campaigns by minorities and political progressives across the country. But along the way, they have become to some an example of politically correct sentiments gone too far, with the potential to mobilize the right and alienate the center.
New disputes seem to be springing up daily.
Mr. 
“Just because Philadelphia wasn’t a part of the Confederacy doesn’t mean we get a pass,” Ms. Gym said in an interview. She is less concerned about turning off voters who support the president than in rousing members of the Democratic base, including minorities, who did not vote in November.
In Chicago, a campaign is underway to remove a monument to Italo Balbo, an Italian air marshal, which the Fascist dictator Benito Mussolini presented to the city in 1933. Balbo Drive is a well-known street in the heart of downtown.
In Boston, there are calls for renaming historic Faneuil Hall because Peter Faneuil, who donated the building to the city in 1743, was a slave owner and trader.
Columbus, who, most Americans learn rather innocently, in 1492 sailed the ocean blue until he discovered the New World, has undergone a revisionist treatment in recent decades because of his impact on native peoples.
In Baltimore, a Columbus monument more than 200 years old was defaced on Monday in an act captured on video as a man stood with a sign reading “Racism: Tear it down.” In Detroit, protesters gathered on Saturday at a Columbus statue. In New York, Mr. de Blasio, responding to the violence in Charlottesville, last week announced a 90-day review of “all symbols of hate on city property.” He specifically mentioned a sidewalk marker on Lower Broadway to Henri Phillippe Pétain, a French collaborator with the Nazis.
“This is complicated stuff. But you know it’s a lot better to be talking about it and trying to work through it than ignoring it,” Mr. de Blasio said, according to The New York Post.
Many argue that issues surrounding Confederate monuments are not complicated at all.
But some Southern blacks are not sure monuments are the best issue to fight over.
Andrew Young, the former Atlanta mayor and civil rights leader, has argued against calls to remove the enormous carved tableau of Confederate leaders on Stone Mountain, Ga., and other Confederate monuments, saying those disputes make more enemies than friends and distract from more substantive issues.
Others say fighting over symbols is even less fruitful when the symbolism is far murkier, like Christopher Columbus. Democrats have cautioned about a rush to remake civic landscapes, in some ways echoing President Trump but warning that his use of the issue is intentionally divisive. “Making what happened in Charlottesville about monuments is distracting,” Senator Claire McCaskill, Democrat of Missouri, told CNN on Wednesday.
Ms. McCaskill is running for re-election next year in a state Mr. Trump won decisively, and she echoed the Democratic leader, Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, who last week pumped the brakes on calls to rid the United States Capitol of Confederate statues. He said Mr. Trump and Stephen K. Bannon, then the president’s chief strategist, were “trying to divert attention” from the president’s refusal to offer a full-throated denunciation of neo-Nazis and other white supremacists whose rally in Charlottesville led to the death of a counterprotester.
Supporters of white nationalist groups maintain that a fervor to tear down monuments only builds their ranks. “It’s a tragedy these monuments are coming down, but every time antifa overreacts, it’s making friends for Confederate heritage,” said Kirk D. Lyons, a North Carolina lawyer, who has been professionally and socially tied to some of the nation’s most visible hate groups. (He denies that he is a white supremacist and describes himself as “a Christian attorney of Southern ancestry.”) Antifa is shorthand for anti-fascist activists.
In polls taken since Charlottesville, majorities of Americans favor keeping Confederate monuments intact, although there are sharp splits by race and party affiliation. Pluralities of Democrats and blacks favor removal, while whites and Republicans oppose altering the status quo. Support for changing street names and other less tangible symbols falls off sharply. That has not stopped Democrats in the Maryland General Assembly from trying to change lyrics to the state song, “Maryland, My Maryland,” a mid-19th-century ditty that calls on Maryland to join the Confederacy.
Larry Sabato, a political scientist at the University of Virginia who watched neo-Nazis march on his own campus, said the left seems to have once again become focused on symbolic issues rather than the ones that most voters care about.
This week, Charlottesville covered its Robert E. Lee statue in Emancipation Park, and another of Gen. Stonewall Jackson, in black shrouds.
Of course, many people argue that what’s important is doing what’s right, not necessarily which side wins politically. And Stephen J. Farnsworth, a political scientist at the University of Mary Washington in Virginia, argued that in the most pressing state contests, November’s election in Virginia for governor and other state offices, it’s not at all clear that the left loses by fighting over the statue of Lee and other monuments.
