BARCELONA, Spain — The attacks in and near Barcelona initially led rival Spanish and Catalan politicians to present an image of solidarity in the face of terrorism.
King Felipe VI and Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy attended solemn commemorations in Barcelona for victims. Mr. Rajoy even held a news conference with Carles Puigdemont, the Catalan leader, whom he had not met officially since April of last year.
But with the end of the hunt for the assailants this week, the tensions that had been masked by the facade of unity are now threatening to boil over, as the political clock ticks toward a Catalan independence referendum scheduled for Oct. 1. Mr. Rajoy has threatened to block that vote with the help of Spanish courts.
The attacks that killed 15 people last week “occurred at the worst moment of the relationship between Catalan and Spanish politicians, and the only thing this has done is to add more tensions below the surface,” said Ramon Perelló, the head of Península, a Barcelona-based publisher.
The attacks have already helped expose the gaps between the Catalan regional and Spanish national governments.
Spain’s interior minister, Juan Ignacio Zoido, and his regional counterpart in Catalonia, Joaquim Forn, publicly disagreed this past weekend in their assessment of whether the terrorist cell had been dismantled.
Mr. Forn also stoked controversy by making a distinction between Catalan and other Spanish victims of the attacks, during an interview with local media.
Those political differences, it is becoming clearer, also have practical security implications that the attack plotters perhaps managed to exploit.
The plotters circumvented a security apparatus that, until last week, had helped Spain avoid attacks like the Madrid train bombings that killed 192 people in 2004.
Two decades ago, Madrid agreed to give Catalonia full control over policing under its own force, the Mossos d’Esquadra. Even before last week’s attacks, however, Catalan separatists were demanding more resources for the Mossos.
On Sunday, Mr. Puigdemont used a television interview to argue that Catalonia should have direct ties to the C.I.A. and other intelligence services, without information passing through Madrid.
Adding to this controversy, the Catalan authorities have now acknowledged that last year a Belgian police officer requested information from a Catalan colleague about Abdelbaki Essati, an imam who is believed to have inspired last week’s attacks. The request, however, was made in “an absolutely informal manner,” Mr. Forn, the region’s interior minister, said Thursday at a news conference.
The next significant test will come on Saturday, when political leaders are urging citizens to join a march in Barcelona to denounce terrorism. Earlier this week, the Popular Unity Candidacy — a far-left and anti-monarchy party known by its Catalan acronym, CUP — threatened to boycott the march if King Felipe attends.
One of the party’s lawmakers, Mireia Boya, told a local radio station that the monarch was “a friend of Qatar and the Emirates” and as such had contributed to the financing of Islamic terrorism. The party’s threat, however, drew a strong rebuke from Mr. Puigdemont.
The CUP is a small but pivotal force in the drive for Catalan independence. Its members have guaranteed that a coalition of separatists hold a majority of the seats in Catalonia’s regional parliament.
The party’s reaction to the attacks suggests they not only aggravated tensions between Madrid and Barcelona but created frictions among the separatists themselves.
After the attacks, Madrid-based newspapers ran editorials urging the Catalan separatist government to abandon its referendum plan. “An attack on this scale must serve as a wake-up call for Catalan political forces to return to reality,” El País wrote.
Such commentary, however, has incensed separatists. “Spain’s politicians and media have a long tradition of using terrorism as a political tool, the clearest example being what happened in 2004,” said Salvador Garcia-Ruiz, the chief executive of Ara, a Catalan newspaper that backs independence.
“We’re now seeing the start of the same kind of manipulation — and I think it will only get worse” as the referendum deadline approaches, he said.
The 2004 bombing of commuter trains in Madrid — only days before a national election — changed the course of Spanish politics.
Voters then punished a conservative government for its rush to blame Basque separatists rather than jihadi militants for the train bombings, Spain’s deadliest terrorist attack.
