Mayor Bill de Blasio said that he “does not believe” in a proposal to charge drivers to enter New York City’s highest-traffic areas and use the proceeds to fund its ailing transportation network, an approach known as congestion pricing, which has lately gotten a boost from Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo.
During an unrelated news conference on Monday, the mayor said that despite Mr. Cuomo expressing his support earlier this month, the prospect of such a system was “inconceivable” given the Republican-controlled State Senate. Moreover, the mayor said, in his most direct expression of his opinion as mayor on the subject, he just does not like the idea.
The mayor’s remarks came in response to a question, during a news conference on public safety, about whether he would want to see drivers paying to enter the city’s most congested areas by the end of a second term, should he be re-elected in November.
Mr. Cuomo began talking about congestion pricing several weeks ago, just as Mr. de Blasio announced his effort to press for a new tax on city residents earning $500,000 or more to support the beleaguered Metropolitan Transportation Authority. That plan immediately met stiff resistance from Senate Republicans who oppose raising taxes.
Mr. de Blasio suggested that his tax plan would have more success in Albany than congestion pricing, a notion scoffed at by Mr. Cuomo’s top aides. “Yes, when one looks for a solid understanding and read of Albany’s political landscape, they should definitely call Bill de Blasio,” Melissa DeRosa, one of Mr. Cuomo’s top aides, wrote sarcastically on Twitter.
The governor has called congestion pricing “an idea whose time has come.” He has not provided details on what he would propose, though he promised to do so by his State of the State address in January. The M.T.A. has been trying a modest experiment in recent months, offering half-priced tolls at night for trucks on the crossings it controls.
A congestion-pricing plan supported by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, which would have included tolls on the Brooklyn Bridge and other East River crossings, failed in the Democratic-led State Assembly in 2008, despite having the backing of then-Gov. David A. Paterson and the leadership of the State Senate Republicans. At the time, polls found support for the proposal in Manhattan but opposition in the four other boroughs.
Alex Matthiessen, the director of the Move NY campaign, said congestion pricing would raise twice the money for transit as Mr. de Blasio’s proposed tax, or about $1.5 billion a year. He said the proposal, versions of which have already been introduced in the Assembly and Senate, “is explicitly predicated on making our current system more fair,” including by cutting tolls for bridges around the city while imposing new ones for drivers entering the central business areas of Manhattan.
Some supporters of the mayor are proponents of congestion pricing, including the Working Families Party, which can be influential in Democratic races, and local 32BJ, which represents private-sector janitors, security guards and others.
