Love “The Bachelor” but hate yourself? Duck into SleepCenter’s cramped Chinatown basement art space on Wednesday for “Here for the Right Reasons,” an endearingly scrappy one-night show where artists will try to process the disquieting implications of their “Bachelor” fandom.
Ms. Niederhoffer, a freelance writer, and Janie Korn, an illustrator, both 29, started watching the show in 2012. At first, it was a joke. Then, it wasn’t. Their group texts with a mutual friend became consumed with “Bachelor” relationship analysis and speculation about behind-the-scenes producer manipulation. They found themselves drawn to the toxic hetero spectacle in the same way that some women read murder books to subconsciously deal with anxieties about violence. “It brought together this sisterhood,” Ms. Korn said.
These days, it’s easy to recognize “The Bachelor” franchise — the 13th season of “The Bachelorette,” featuring the series’ first black lead, is currently careering toward its inevitable rush-proposal ending — as a vacuous project complicit in various crimes against humanity. (Among them: the subjugation of women; the exploitation of the mentally ill; the perpetuation of racial stereotyping; and the advancement of corporate synergy.) But it’s even easier to blow two to three hours a week watching it.
“It projects a majestic aesthetic, which falls in line with your television persona,” Ms. Zito writes in her sales pitch, adding, “I’m not a weird psycho fan, I’m just a really good artist.” He does not respond.
Elsewhere, the illustrator Carolyn Figel recasts the contestant Corinne Olympios’s sponsored content for Casper mattresses and FitTea into delicate line drawings that emphasize the underlying fragility of her brash social media performance. Ms. Korn exhibits a set of ghoulish miniatures depicting Mr. Viall’s family members, who have appeared frequently on the show in support of his many love journeys, posed alongside the creepy star of internet scary stories, Slender Man; the piece draws parallels between two bizarre fantasy worlds that hold real people’s lives in their grasp.
A “Bachelor Nation” flag hanging above the proceedings places the show’s fixations on true love and TV stardom in sharp relief — it’s emblazoned with a diamond ring and inscribed with reality TV contract legalese. The whole place is covered in scratchy artificial red roses sourced from dollar stores.
Like watching “The Bachelor” itself, “Here for the Right Reasons” offers opportunities to get swept away in the moment and also feel bad about yourself later. In an interactive installation, guests can step into a Final Rose Ceremony, walk down a candlelit red carpet and listen as the host, Chris Harrison, counsels them toward a proposal, all to buzzingly suspenseful effect.
One of the dirty secrets of “The Bachelor” franchise is that some of its most committed fans are people who feel they’re a little bit above it. The sprawling “Bachelor” media empire gives viewers the opportunity to process the show’s disturbing machinations through constant meta-discussion — there are recaps, podcasts, fantasy leagues, spoiler blogs, Twitter hashtags, cast memoirs, message boards, hundreds of interlocking contestant Instagram presences and now, merman portraiture.
The more unsettling the show seems, the more brainspace it consumes, and the more obsession it breeds. As the sweet, charming Rachel Lindsay, the show’s first black “Bachelorette,” has been thrown into the show’s sexual and racial hellscape this season, the dark spectacle has grown more transfixing than ever. “Here for the Right Reasons” will feature a prayer for Ms. Lindsay.
Is "Bachelor”-inspired art “good”? I’m not an art critic; I’m just a woman who watches “The Bachelor” every week and feels gross about it. For me, it’s not just good — it’s necessary.