Our guide to pop and rock shows and the best of live jazz.
MICHELLE BRANCH at Webster Hall (Aug. 8, 8 p.m.). Webster Hall has played a central role in the cultural life of the East Village for over 100 years; the current owners, who have hosted concerts and club nights there since the early 1990s, are leaving this month to make way for a major renovation and new management. The singer-songwriter Michelle Branch, who recently released a new album, “Hopeless Romantic,” is the final performer booked at Webster Hall’s main space before it closes indefinitely. With Haerts.
LINDSEY BUCKINGHAM AND CHRISTINE McVIE at Beacon Theater (Aug. 10, 8 p.m.). When Fleetwood Mac’s classic late-1970s lineup reunited for a world tour in 2014, the singers and songwriters Lindsey Buckingham and Christine McVie began working on new material together. The resulting album received positive reviews in June, and now the pair is touring, with set lists that draw on Mr. Buckingham’s and Ms. McVie’s rich catalogs as band mates and solo artists.
CUPCAKKE at Le Poisson Rouge (Aug. 10, 9 p.m.). The 20-year-old Chicago rapper CupcakKe is one of the most original voices in hip-hop today, with lyrics that alternate between extreme vulgarity and heart-rending honesty. This year she has made strides toward mainstream popularity with a strong album, “Queen Elizabitch,” and an scene-stealing guest appearance on the Charli XCX song “Lipgloss.” This Greenwich Village show is a golden chance to see CupcakKe in concert before she moves on to bigger stages.
LOGIC AND JOEY BADASS at Barclays Center (Aug. 8, 8 p.m.). The Maryland-born rapper Logic’s stage name offers a clue to how he approaches music: His albums resemble densely plotted dissertations on religion, politics, his own biracial identity and dozens of other topics. The results, while divisive to some listeners, have attracted a large and devoted fan base. Logic’s third LP, “Everybody,” recently topped the Billboard charts, and this summer he is touring arenas with the trenchant Brooklyn lyricist Joey Badass as an opening act.
RESIDENTE at Terminal 5 (Aug. 10, 8 p.m.). After more than a decade at the helm of the protean Puerto Rican group Calle 13, the incisive Spanish-language rapper and producer Residente recently split off in search of new frontiers. His self-titled solo debut was inspired in part by a DNA test that revealed his family’s roots around the world; Residente recorded the album with musicians hailing from at least 10 countries, and critics have praised his far-reaching vision of global unity.
THE SELECTER at Knitting Factory (Aug. 9, 8 p.m.). The rise of Thatcherite politics in late-1970s and early-’80s Britain helped drive the parallel ascent of bands like the Selecter, which melded breezy Jamaican rhythms, punk-rock attitude and anti-racist activism into the genre known as two-tone ska. With right-wing governments once again ruling Britain and the United States, the Selecter has returned as well: The current lineup of the band, featuring the singer Pauline Black and other key members, is touring this summer to promote a coming album called “Daylight.” With Rude Boy George and the Pandemics.
A TRIBUTE TO GERI ALLEN at the Village Vanguard (Aug. 8-13, 8:30 and 10:30 p.m.). Ms. Allen, a pianist, lived a bold musical life, ignoring the lines of demarcation that were so closely guarded in jazz during the 1980s, when she was emerging. As a leader, she released nearly 20 albums, from avant-funk to imagistic straight-ahead to the avant-garde; as an accompanist, she was known for creating a sense of weightlessness and possibility beneath and around her band mates. Ms. Allen, who died in June, will receive a tribute next week at the Village Vanguard, where the former members of her trio, the drummer Terri Lyne Carrington and the bassist Esperanza Spalding, will welcome a handful of guests: the saxophonist Joe Lovano on Tuesday, the trumpeter Nicholas Payton Wednesday through next Friday, and the saxophonist Ravi Coltrane on Aug. 12 and 13.
BRYAN AND THE AARDVARKS FEATURING DAVID BINNEY at Threes Brewing (Aug. 6, 8:30 and 10 p.m.). Led by the bassist Bryan Copeland, this group plays deftly sculpted music with an indie-rock splendor and a starry indeterminacy. At Threes Brewing, the ensemble will play music from its most recent album, “Sounds From the Deep Field,” with help from a special guest, the acutely virtuosic alto saxophonist David Binney. Laila and Smitty, an eccentric folk-rock project led by the trumpeter and sometime vocalist Kenny Warren, will perform an opening set.
SHAREL CASSITY AND ELEKTRA at Ginny’s Supper Club (Aug. 10, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). Ms. Cassity hails from Oklahoma, a fact that might seem like a surprise for a decidedly New York-based jazz musician — until you hear her braying, live-wire sound on the alto saxophone, and you consider the heritage of her home state. Think of Buster Smith, for instance, the altoist who joined the Oklahoma City Blue Devils in 1925, and later the Count Basie Orchestra, helping point the way toward jump blues and postwar R&B. Yes, Ms. Cassity’s musical inheritance stretches back that far. And her style is nearly as invigorating as its antecedents.
BILL FRISELL at the Stone (Aug. 8-13, 8:30 p.m.). Intimacy befits Mr. Frisell, a guitarist who has known how to build space and density in a single gesture since his days on New York’s downtown scene in the early 1980s. On “Small Town,” his new album of duets with the bassist Thomas Morgan, Mr. Frisell’s homey, plangent guitar sound is the essence of patient grace. He comes to the Stone next week under even sparer circumstances, playing six consecutive nights of solo guitar.
ERIC HARLAND at Jazz Standard (Aug. 8-10 and 12-13, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.; Aug. 11, 6:15 and 7:30 p.m.). Mr. Harland, a Houston-born drummer, boils down the influences of gospel, hip-hop and jazz into a roux of languor and coolness, even when it’s spilling over with activity. For six nights at Jazz Standard he will welcome a rotating crew of collaborators, including the pianists Taylor Eigsti and BigYuki; the bassists Michael League and Harish Raghavan; the vocalist Chris Turner; and, on Aug. 12, the tenor saxophone powerhouse Chris Potter.
INTERSECT at Bryant Park (Aug. 4-5). This free two-day festival in Midtown is stacked with an intergenerational buffet of talent. All four of the first day’s performances, which start at 6 p.m., include music by the pianist and composer Billy Childs. His music integrates the influences of Chick Corea, CTI Records’ studio-driven sound, contemporary chamber music, and the film scores of composers like Howard Shore and Hans Zimmer. Mr. Childs himself will close Friday evening’s programming with his quartet. Saturday’s program, beginning at 2 p.m., features performances by the pianist Helen Sung and the vocalist Luciana Souza, followed by three different groups exploring music by the clarinetist, composer and conductor Derek Bermel.
ULYSSES OWENS JR. at Dizzy’s Club Coca-Cola (Aug. 9-10, 7:30 and 9:30 p.m.). When not working as a sideman for the bassist Christian McBride, Mr. Owens, a drummer, has been quietly compiling an impressive catalog of recordings as a leader. His first three albums were tightly orchestrated affairs for midsize combos, driven by Mr. Owens’s crafty, soul-tinged tunes and arrangements. On his fourth album, “Falling Forward,” out this week, he pares things down, playing with just the bassist Reuben Rogers and the young vibraphonist Joel Ross. The results are raw and rewarding.
