WASHINGTON — Emboldened by the failure of Republicans to pass health care legislation on their own, Senate Democrats are seizing the opportunity to influence the coming overhaul of the tax code with a call for bipartisanship.
But the overture got a frosty reception from Republicans on Tuesday despite recent musings about working across party lines.
On Tuesday, 45 Senate Democrats sent a letter to President Trump; the Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell; and Senator Orrin G. Hatch, the Republican chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, urging them to work with Democrats on a tax plan.
The Democrats are reaching out as they have been trying to revamp their populist economic agenda and while Republicans are reeling from their failed effort to repeal the Affordable Care Act. Both parties are thinking about the Republicans’ ability to press ahead with their agenda while maintaining strict partisan lines.
“We are confident that, by working together, we could modernize our tax system to increase working families’ wages, improve middle-class job growth, promote domestic investment, modernize our outdated business and international tax system and put in place sound fiscal policy,” the group wrote.
Senator Chuck Schumer, the minority leader, and Senator Ron Wyden, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Finance Committee, organized the drafting of the letter, which lays out their priorities. Three Democratic senators who are up for re-election next year — Joe Donnelly of Indiana, Joe Manchin III of West Virginia and Heidi Heitkamp of North Dakota — did not sign the letter. They could be ripe targets for Republicans looking for Democrats to get on board with their tax plan.
Despite the outreach, bipartisanship will not come easy.
On taxes, Democrats tend to favor raising taxes on the rich to pay for cuts that would reduce tax rates for middle-income families. The parties are in closer agreement on changes to the corporate tax system, but Democrats argue that the cuts Republicans are proposing are far too deep.
In the conditions laid out in their letter, the Democrats insisted that changes to tax laws not increase the tax burden on the middle class and that the wealthiest 1 percent of taxpayers not see their tax bills shrink.
They also insisted that Republicans return to “regular order” and not try to push a tax bill through Congress using budget reconciliation rules that require only a simple majority in the Senate.
Finally, they want a rewrite of the tax code that does not add to the deficit and is not paid for with cuts to programs such as Medicare, Medicaid and Social Security.
For much of this year, Democrats have criticized the proposed tax policies of Republicans as giveaways to the rich. It was clear on Tuesday that Republicans are not eager to let Democrats meddle with their plans for a tax overhaul, even if they would welcome a few of their votes.
For its part, the Trump administration has been more vocal this week about the importance of attracting some Democrats to its tax plan. At a gathering on Monday of conservative activists sponsored by Americans for Prosperity, the political network of the Koch brothers, Marc Short, the White House legislative affairs director, made the case that Democrats need to be brought into the fold. The Republican majority in the Senate, he said, was too slim for party members to count only on one another.
It remains unclear how enthusiastic Democrats really would be to make compromises with Republicans that would allow Mr. Trump to score a major legislative victory. In the battle over the Affordable Care Act, even potentially vulnerable Democratic senators from states that the president won last year held firm in their opposition to the repeal of the health care law.
Relegated to the minority, however, Democrats are trying to stake out the moral high ground. Mr. Schumer warned on Tuesday that Republicans could suffer the same fate on taxes that they did on health care if they continue to operate alone.
Cooperation between the parties will be necessary for Congress to deal with more immediately pressing legislative priorities. The debt ceiling must be lifted by the end of September, and Mr. Schumer, Mr. McConnell and Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin huddled on Tuesday morning to discuss the way forward.
Although Mr. Mnuchin and Democrats want a “clean” lift of the statutory borrowing limit, many Republicans are pushing for spending cuts or changes to budget process to be linked to any legislation.
No breakthrough was made on that issue.