Six months into the Trump presidency, two symbols of American financial might — the Dow and the dollar — have taken divergent paths, highlighting the complexities that investors face as the global economy hums, while Washington is enmeshed in political turmoil.
The Dow Jones industrial average on Wednesday passed the 22,000 milestone for the first time, an 11 percent surge for the year that is being driven of late by increasingly bullish retail investors piling into stocks. Strong corporate earnings reports, bolstered by the news on Tuesday of Apple’s higher-than-expected quarterly profit and revenue, propelled the markets higher.
Over this same period, the United States dollar has lost about 10 percent of its value against a basket of six major currencies.
The near-mirror image fall in the dollar has been especially pronounced in recent weeks, stemming in part from concerns that President Trump’s political problems will hamper his ability to pass a major tax reduction or an infrastructure bill.
And while it is true that there has been little in terms of legislative action to back up his boast, investment experts say that the president’s promise to slash regulations and cut taxes — even if unfulfilled — has stoked long-dormant animal spirits among investors. That corporate earnings are excelling and the global economy is growing faster than many expected has only added to the bullish vibe.
While there is no doubt that the animal spirits have done their work, just as important to the market’s recent rally has been the significant fall in the dollar — not just against the euro and the yen, but against more volatile currencies like the Mexican peso and the Brazilian real.
Even the Chinese renminbi, once criticized by Mr. Trump as artificially low, has gained value against the dollar, climbing more than 3 percent for the year.
A dollar in retreat means that trillions more dollars are sloshing around the global economy, ending up in 100-year Argentine bonds, Turkish airline stocks, junk bonds with stripped down investor protections and, of course, Dow stalwarts like Amazon, Microsoft and Boeing.
The carry trade is financial jargon that describes the flow of money from low return assets to those with a higher return — not least when investors use a cheaper asset (dollars) to pay for riskier assets that promise better performance.
When central banks, especially the Federal Reserve, intervened aggressively in global markets after the financial crisis, the immediate effect was rock bottom interest rates, a weak dollar and a search for “carry” by global investors.
Yet this trade lost some of its urgency in recent years as investors bet that the Fed would raise rates and that Mr. Trump’s expansive fiscal policies would give a boost to the United States economy and the dollar.
The dollar’s rapid ascent in the weeks immediately after the 2016 election spurred fears that an abrupt dollar run-up would damage global markets, leading to a rout in global currencies — especially those in developing nations.
Instead, Trump administration officials have veered from the standard practice of talking up the dollar by pretty much doing the opposite. This approach was spurred largely by the administration’s tough talk on trade and support for American manufacturers whose exports benefit from a less robust dollar.
But it is also true that Mr. Trump, both from within his cabinet and his outside panel of economic advisers, has heard the view from Wall Street that an overly strong dollar would not help American financial markets.
Think of it as a rush of perhaps less discerning money into stocks, propelling stock market indexes past one historical milestone after another.
For example, as of Monday, the Dow had reached 30 record highs this year, according to research by Charlie Bilello, an analyst with Pension Partners, a financial advisory firm.
In a recent strategy note, Mr. Yardeni highlighted the effect of investor money pouring into exchange traded funds, which are easily traded, low-cost funds that track all varieties of indexes and investment themes.
Over the last year, $232 billion has flowed into E.T.F.s that invest in domestic equities. In recent months, as the dollar has softened, global E.T.F.s that invest in Europe and emerging markets have been deluged with money and have taken in $121 billion for the year.
Leading the way have been E.T.F.s that invest in higher-yielding, harder-to-trade securities like emerging market bonds, leveraged loans and bonds issued by low-rated corporations.
Institutional and retail investors use the funds to make quick and longer term investment bets. But much of the flows, of late, seem to be coming from retail investors, many of whom were sitting on the sidelines in the last few years, analysts say.
The investment firm Schwab, which oversees $3 trillion in assets from individuals and independent investment firms, reported in its second-quarter earnings last month that cash held by clients had dropped to 11.5 percent in June from 13 percent in December — a fairly precipitous reduction for such a short period.
Beyond the stimulative effect that a struggling dollar has on global investment flows, some analysts point to another, more specific reason that might explain the near perfect correlation between the dollar’s fall and the Dow’s rise.
The Dow, much more so than the S.&P. 500 and the Nasdaq composite index, has a weightier concentration in multinationals that rely on exporting their goods overseas, like Caterpillar, Boeing and Coca-Cola, to name a few.
The weak dollar and strong growth in Asia, Europe and many emerging markets will be a boon for these companies, a number of which suffered in past years when the dollar was ascendant and worries about Europe and developing nations abounded.
“There is no doubt that the big news — a drop in the dollar — is benefiting the Dow more than other indices,” said Jim Paulsen, chief investment strategist for the Leuthold Group, an investment firm based in Minneapolis.
