Sign up here to get the Smarter Living newsletter in your inbox every Monday morning.
I’m 21, and I’ve had 33 roommates.
I’ve had at least one roommate at a time, at most six, and everything in between. I’ve slept four to a room, and six to a tiny apartment. Right now, I live in one of the most spacious, least populous living arrangements I’ve ever had — my own room in a two-bedroom in Manhattan, in which I can actually fit a queen-size bed.
A roommate situation can, at best, make life significantly happier, or, at worst, make going home every night a living nightmare. So as I settle into my new place with my 33rd roommate, I wanted to set myself up for success. Over the past week I have texted, emailed, called and accosted half the people I used to have morning coffee with to investigate my own past as a roommate.
Some cited quirky things we laughed about, like my excessive baking and weird Eastern European remedies, but most gave me something I could work with. I compiled a few of my common mistakes so that you can try to avoid them.
Make it safe for your roommate to complain.
It’s a painfully obvious adage: Communication is key.
How you communicate with your roommate, and how comfortable you both are with offering and accepting criticism, can often determine how well you get along. So immediately set as a standard that you’d like your roommate to come to you with complaints, rather than letting feelings stew, experts said.
The University of Miami is starting a campaign this year to combat that problem, using formal roommate agreements to set clear boundaries and encouraging students to avoid immediate parental involvement. Jim Smart, executive director of housing and residential life, said living with roommates was one of the most formative experiences college students can have.
So no texts, no Post-it notes, no telling yourself, “It’s fine.” If something is nagging at you today, it’s probably not going to disappear.
Look, Costco is amazing, but probably not when you share an ant-size kitchen with four other people.
When you’re trying to get through the myriad stresses of your day, you don’t want to be tripped up when you get home by something that makes you say, “Whoa, that’s distracting.” In common spaces, avoid getting in the way of everybody’s routine. Your packages, books or mail might not be annoying to you, but that clutter makes for unnecessary stimuli for your roommates, who expected to come home to a clean coffee table or counter. Keep it subtle and simple. Honestly, no one needs that many chia seeds.
Don’t expect people to change lifestyles, but be open to compromise.
Most of us have a friend or two we know we could never live with. Maybe they’re really anal about cleaning, or extremely messy; maybe they never sleep, or wake up at the crack of dawn. We love getting to know them, but we know the contrasts would be too much to endure under one roof.
When you choose roommates, it’s not always possible or realistic to analyze their lifestyle preferences — sleep habits, cleanliness, food preferences, how they like to socialize — beforehand, especially if you’re moving to a new city or finding a new apartment in a hurry.
However, you should go over some of your fundamental values or lifestyle preferences before moving in: Are you social? Do you like hosting people or is that going to annoy you? Are you into home décor? Do you just want the cheapest options possible?
No one likes to tiptoe around at night, or in the morning, especially if that’s when you do your best work or like being active. It’s easiest to live with people who share your sleep preferences, but it’s also possible to compromise. Both sides should put in an effort here: Light sleepers (like me) should try out ear plugs or white noise. Heavier sleepers or night owls should avoid being too loud or setting tons of alarms. Don’t be afraid to tell someone if they woke you up last night. Don’t wait until it happens enough that you’re angry.
Yes, roommates who are different from you can be a great way to shake up your routines, but be realistic with yourself about how much you’re willing to adapt after a long and stressful week.
Sit down and talk about how you handle stress. Seriously.
It can be easy to miscommunicate stress and make your roommate feel as if they’ve done something wrong, leaving them with confusion or even resentment. Tell them what’s going on in your life (perhaps a quick “I’ve got a lot going on at work”), and verbalize whether you need some space or quiet.
Keith Renshaw, a clinical psychologist specializing in interpersonal relationships, says that even having awareness of your roommate’s stress can be incredibly helpful.
Take a different commute that’s more relaxing, even if it’s longer. Listen to music on your commute instead of reading something that makes you tense. Do a guided meditation made for your commute with apps like Simple Habit or Calm. Set an alarm for your way home from work to remind you that you can’t think about work anymore.
Most roommate problems aren’t egregious or obvious.
She told me she’d rented out my old room to people who had stolen from her and even peeped into her bedroom while she was sleeping. Our small disagreements, in comparison, seemed to fade into the background. And this seemed to be the reason all of the people I reached out to had trouble coming up with anything concrete, in retrospect.
Try to remember the big picture: This is a rare relationship with someone who will see you at your crankiest, your groggiest, your most sleep-deprived and annoying. You will deal with each other for more hours than probably anyone else in your life. My living arrangements have given me some of the best friends of my life, and even when they didn’t, we learned huge lessons about how to treat people and how to compromise.