Sunday Review|Donald Was a Creep. Too Bad Hillary Couldn’t Say It.
Donald Was a Creep. Too Bad Hillary Couldn’t Say It.
You’re walking down the street and there’s a man trailing uncomfortably close behind you. A co-worker stands a little too intimately in your personal space. There’s a stranger breathing down your neck on the subway. Each time, you do a quick mental arithmetic: Do I ignore it? Move away quickly, but without causing a scene? Say something? Yell?
This second-guessing of oneself and playing-out of alternate narratives in one’s own head is a dominant soundtrack of women’s lives. It’s also the white noise behind every case, public or privately discussed, of sexual harassment, abuse and rape.
Whatever we choose as option A, there is always a chorus, inside our own minds and outside of it, contending it would have been better if we had just gone with option B.
So would it? If Mrs. Clinton had spun around and called Mr. Trump a creep, would she have effectively stopped his onstage harassment?
Mr. Trump sells this same sentiment — you’re owed, you haven’t gotten your due — to his white male base. Onstage at that debate, Mr. Trump responded like a lot of men do when they feel their rightful place of authority is threatened, and an enormous number of male voters (and some female voters) went right along with him.
Had Mrs. Clinton responded forcefully during that debate, she would most likely have faced the same penalties other women do when they speak up at work: being seen as unpleasant, aggressive and less competent. Mrs. Clinton already faced a likability problem, which many commentators insisted had nothing to do with gender — she just wasn’t charismatic, she didn’t smile enough, listening to her talk felt like hearing your wife yell at you to do the dishes.
Mr. Trump may have reveled in condescending, if uncreative, name-calling during his campaign (“Crooked Hillary,” “Little Marco”), but the rules were different for Mrs. Clinton.
Her biggest campaign gaffe was calling a subset of Trump supporters — those motivated by bigotry — “deplorables,” a move the Republican Party quickly exploited. Putting aside the fact that Mrs. Clinton was right (a subset of Trump supporters were in fact motivated by racism, and he retains strong support from his base even after equivocating on neo-Nazi violence in Charlottesville), any anger or defensiveness on her part was cast as yelling, shouting and shrill.
Do we really think Mrs. Clinton’s calling Mr. Trump a creep would have been met more positively?
Campaigns against public and professional harassment have increasingly focused on bystander intervention — that is, encouraging witnesses to harassment to step in. The moderators of the debate, Martha Raddatz and Anderson Cooper, admonished Mr. Trump several times to let Mrs. Clinton speak.  And who can blame them? It would have been uncomfortable, and they would have faced accusations of bias. They certainly haven’t publicly wondered, as Mrs. Clinton has, whether a different split-second choice could have changed the course of world history; they haven’t had to stand by while the public wonders for them.
Nor should they. There’s no perfect way to intervene, and intervention often has costs. But for Mrs. Clinton, on that stage, that lack of intervention put her in the same position as so many women who are harassed in plain view of others who do nothing: all alone, second-guessing her own gut reaction.
The unsatisfactory truth is that there’s no one perfect way to respond to harassment, menacing or the many smaller indignities and larger acts of aggression women endure. It’s comforting, in the way a little smug superiority can feel comforting when it tamps down any nagging inclination to consider our own accountability, to conclude that if only this one woman had behaved a little differently, we would have respected her more, or at least hated her less.
Mrs. Clinton herself is now engaging in a particularly feminine (and particularly unpleasant) psychological turmoil — the hashing and rehashing of saying too little or saying too much, the spinning in one’s head that maybe you just are too little or you just are too much. And there’s the biting isolation of concluding it must be you who is terribly and irredeemably flawed, and the gut-punch that comes when others agree by demeaning or humiliating or threatening you — you, who individually and obviously does not belong here, whether “here” is on the presidential debate stage, in the corner office, or walking down the street in a new summer dress.
No public figure in modern history has had her choices combed over with as much tick-picking meticulousness as Hillary Clinton, and the impending release of her latest book has already set off a new round of alternate histories and what-she-should-have-dones. What these correctives routinely fail to do is consider that the rest of us — media, voters, all of us who perpetuate norms around gender and power in a million subtle ways — have created an unnavigable landscape for female “firsts” generally, and for this one especially.
While the news media was obsessing over emails and deplorables and scandals amounting to little more than innuendo, and while voters were shrugging that Mrs. Clinton just didn’t seem honest or relatable, a shameless misogynist was unabashedly and loudly firing up deep sexual and racial biases to catapult himself into the White House. He stalked a woman onstage while we all watched, and then he won the election. Now we expect her to be very sorry.
Perhaps it’s not just Hillary Clinton who should be thinking about what she could have done differently.