The dispute had centered on repeated efforts by PPG Industries, an American rival, to take over Akzo Nobel, which counts Dulux paint among its brands. Akzo Nobel rebuffed the approaches, and PPG abandoned its pursuit in June.
That decision prompted the conflict with Elliott, an American hedge fund founded by the billionaire Paul E. Singer. Elliott urged Akzo Nobel to engage in talks with PPG, and the fund eventually went to court to try to force a shareholder meeting aimed at replacing Akzo Nobel’s chairman, Antony Burgmans. As the dispute raged, Elliott became Akzo Nobel’s largest shareholder, with a stake of about 9 percent.
The hedge fund is among several activist investors that have gained clout in recent years and that have taken aim at major corporate targets, pushing to shake up strategy in an effort to bolster the companies’ stock prices. Giants like Procter & Gamble, Nestlé and Samsung have all been targeted.
European companies have increasingly found themselves in the cross hairs as American funds. Faced with growing competition from other activist investors at home, the funds have sought opportunities overseas.
Elliott also agreed to support the appointment of Thierry Vanlancker, Akzo Nobel’s chief executive, to the paint maker’s management board and the nomination of two other directors to its supervisory board. Mr. Vanlancker was named chief executive last month after Akzo Nobel said that its former top executive, Ton Büchner, was stepping down immediately for health reasons.
Akzo Nobel said it intended to nominate a third director to its supervisory board after consulting with its major shareholders, including Elliott.
“I am pleased our recent constructive discussions with Elliott improved understanding between both parties, Mr. Burgmans said in a news release.
The agreement came before Akzo Nobel’s shareholder meeting next month.
PPG Industries first approached Akzo Nobel about a combination in March, but the Dutch company rejected that offer and two subsequent ones. PPG’s last offer valued the company at $26.4 billion. Akzo Nobel also declined to engage in further talks, saying that PPG had done little to address concerns about potential antitrust issues.
Akzo Nobel has discussed spinning off its specialty chemicals arm, which had 4.8 billion euros, or about $5.6 billion, in revenue last year. On Wednesday, the Dutch company said that its agreement with Elliott included an “alignment” on its strategy to fully separate that unit.
