WASHINGTON — If President Trump is considering whether to fire Stephen K. Bannon, his chief strategist, as has been rumored for weeks, Mr. Bannon just gave him several new reasons.
People close to Mr. Bannon said he believed the comments were part of an off-the-record conversation with Robert Kuttner with The American Prospect that, according to the magazine, he initiated.
Still, they come as Mr. Bannon’s adversaries are aggressively seeking his ouster from the White House because of his links to Breitbart News, his feuding with other White House aides and a suspicion that he is the source of leaks about internal chaos inside the West Wing.
Mr. Bannon’s critics intensified their efforts after last weekend’s racial unrest in Charlottesville, Va. Outraged over Mr. Trump’s insistence that “both sides” were to blame for the violence that erupted during a white nationalist rally, leaving one woman dead, human rights activists demanded that the president fire so-called nationalists working in the West Wing. That group of hard-right populists in the White House is led by Mr. Bannon.
“We’ll see what happens with Mr. Bannon,” Mr. Trump said.
In the American Prospect article, titled “Steve Bannon, Unrepentant,” the president’s strategist appears eager to lash out at his ideological rivals in the administration, bragging about his ability to defeat those who oppose a more aggressive posture toward China on trade policy.
“That’s a fight I fight every day here,” Mr. Bannon said. “We’re still fighting. There’s Treasury and Gary Cohn and Goldman Sachs lobbying,” he said, referring to Mr. Cohn, the director of the National Economic Council at the White House.
He also specifically named Susan Thornton, the acting director of the East Asian and Pacific Affairs division at the State Department, as someone he will dispatch.
Just a week after the president repeatedly threatened North Korea with military action in response to Pyongyang’s nuclear missile program, Mr. Bannon mocked that position as nonsensical.
Speaking on Tuesday, the same day that Mr. Trump was being assailed for his response to the Charlottesville protests, Mr. Bannon also dismissed the right-wing fringe as “a collection of clowns.” He said the more liberals talk about “identity politics,” the easier it will be for Mr. Trump to defeat Democrats by focusing on economic nationalism.
Mr. Bannon told friends that he did not believe that his conversation was an on-the-record interview. But Mr. Bannon is a savvy media operator who rarely speaks without a clear understanding of the rules. Mr. Kuttner said the issue of whether the call was on the record never came up.