This article was updated on Aug. 31.
A late August hurricane menacing the Gulf Coast. Residents plucked from rooftops. A convention center repurposed as an emergency shelter. A test of a presidency.
Although it is still unfolding, Harvey, now a tropical storm, evokes comparisons to Hurricane Katrina in 2005. Here’s a quick rundown of what we know about similarities and differences between the two.
Harvey: It made landfall in Rockport, Tex., on Friday as a Category 4 storm, measuring 200 miles across, but was quickly downgraded. But flooding and rain topped 47 inches in some areas by the time Harvey was downgraded to a tropical depression Wednesday.
Harvey: Local officials said there were at least 39 deaths in Texas so far that were related or suspected to be related to the storm. Officials said they were prepared for that number to inch higher as floodwaters began to recede.
As for the economy, the Gulf region’s capacity as an oil and gas hub — Houston accounted for 2.9 percent of the nation’s gross domestic product in 2015 — does not appear to have been seriously compromised. So far in Texas, there are 300,000 people without power.
Harvey: By contrast, Harvey brought a deluge, with up to 50 inches of rain in some areas — more than Houston receives in a year.
Harvey: Houston did not call on residents to evacuate, then urged those who could to shelter in place. However, as the rain continued on Monday, a growing number of other jurisdictions — like Bay City, which expected 10 feet of water downtown — urged residents to leave. More than 30,000 people remained in shelters in the region Thursday.
Harvey: Tens of thousands of homes were either damaged or destroyed. But the vast majority of homes in Harvey’s path are not insured against flooding, according to figures from the National Flood Insurance Program. FEMA officials estimated that 450,000 people were likely to seek federal aid. So far, 95,745 people in Texas have been approved for emergency assistance, which includes financial help with rent, repairs and lost property. FEMA has so far disbursed about $57 million to citizens in Texas.
Harvey: Harvey will likely sharpen an ongoing debate over whether Houston, a city driven by real estate, has overbuilt at the expense of flood control. While Katrina showed a failure to build well, Harvey might come to represent a warning about climate change.