In May, Picador Books sent a copy of an upcoming thriller, Christopher Yates’s “Grist Mill Road,” to the actress Krysten Ritter. The publicity team was thrilled when Ritter, the star of the Netflix series “Jessica Jones,” agreed to blurb the book — and even more thrilled when, unprompted, she shared a picture of it with her 655,000 followers on Instagram. “There’s a good chance her Instagram is going to help the book more than her blurb on the back cover, which will mostly be seen by people picking it up in a physical bookstore,” says James Meader, Picador’s executive director of publicity.
A person need not necessarily be a celebrity to attract a publishing house’s attention. “What we really look for is people who are a little more niche, who do make sense for a particular title,” says Lydia Hirt, the marketing director at Riverhead Books and Viking Books. Instagram’s director of fashion partnerships, Eva Chen, for example, is not a household name, but she regularly recommends books to her 850,000 followers. “She’s somebody who absolutely puts books in front of a group of people who may not have normally come across them,” says Cristina Gilbert, the vice president of sales and marketing at Bloomsbury. Chen’s endorsements of young-adult fiction are an unlikely pairing with her carefully composed photographs of beauty products, handbags and designer shoes — which is exactly what makes them so valuable to book publicists, who might struggle to reach her audience through more traditional outreach. Other book publicists have received promotional boosts from the comedian Patton Oswalt on Twitter and the fashion designer Zac Posen on Instagram.
It’s important to acknowledge that book publishers have always sent advance copies of books to the rich and famous in the hope that word would spread among the elite and then trickle down to the masses. (They call the practice “bigmouth publicity.”) The difference now is that celebrities communicate directly with their fans on social media — allowing them to highlight intellectual interests that are often ignored by the traditional tabloid press. Several actresses, in fact, are not only sharing the books they love but are actually building online communities around reading. And there are Instagrammers on whose promotional power nearly every book publicist agrees.
The Instagram account of the Bravo Network host and producer isn’t just photos of the rich and famous: Cohen also shares some of his favorite books with his 2.2 million followers. He has endorsed Nathan Hill’s debut novel, “The Nix,” as well as the memoirs of some of his celebrity acquaintances, like Anderson Cooper and Amy Schumer.
That the creator of HBO’s “Girls” is a bookworm is no surprise: She frequently writes for The New Yorker and published her first collection of essays in 2014. On Instagram, Dunham has 3.3 million followers, and she shares everything from old classics to snippets from upcoming books. Dunham also excerpts new books in her online newsletter LennyLetter and partnered last year with Random House to start her own publishing imprint.
