On an unseasonably pleasant July evening, the line outside Housing Works Bookstore Cafe in SoHo stretched down most of Crosby Street. Inside, it was standing room only as Jeremiah Moss, bearded and in a black T-shirt, read from his book, “Vanishing New York: How a Great City Lost Its Soul” (Dey Street, 2017). The book chronicles how (and why) a city of diners and delis morphed into a string of interchangeable blocks filled with forgettable stores of the sort that could be found in a Long Island strip mall.
For a decade, Mr. Moss has written the popular blog with the exhaustive title, “Jeremiah’s Vanishing New York a.k.a. the Book of Lamentations: A Bitterly Nostalgic Look at a City in the Process of Going Extinct.” Concealing his identity behind a pen name, Mr. Moss gave voice to that sinking feeling you get when you walk past your favorite restaurant or bar or bookstore and discover that it has been replaced with a Chase bank.
The book is something of an unmasking for Mr. Moss, who revealed his real identity to The New Yorker in June. It turns out Mr. Moss is a 46-year-old psychoanalyst and social worker called Griffin Hansbury who lives in an East Village rent-stabilized walk-up apartment and prefers we still call him Jeremiah. Mr. Moss recycled a character’s name from an unpublished novel he wrote “about a guy who is going through a midlife crisis and he wants to kind of return to the past,” he told me. He has written a sequel, also unpublished.
Is this a call to action or a wake? Maybe a little of both.
Mr. Moss started out as the neighborhood curmudgeon of the internet, writing his first post, “oh Chumley’s we love you get up,” in 2007 when the Greenwich Village restaurant and onetime speakeasy closed after part of a wall and a chimney collapsed. In doing so, he created a platform for New Yorkers to gather online to mourn the demise of unofficial landmarks of commerce like the old Rizzoli Bookstore and De Robertis Pasticceria & Caffé. In the comments section, readers sometimes debate which losses deserve the collective pity party.
The blog also introduced a new generation of New Yorkers to activism. “He helped bridge the gap between people who just griped and those who are going to the meetings, going to the protests, writing letters to elected officials,” said Andrew Berman, the executive director of the Greenwich Village Society for Historic Preservation.
The effort to save Cafe Edison inspired lunch mobs, carolers singing about matzo balls and a YouTube video parodying Liza Minnelli and Larry King. The landlord was unmoved by the theatrics and the cafe closed anyway.
But the Moss blog and the idea that the city is being invaded by Pinkberry yogurt and overpriced condos, are not without detractors. “People have always been complaining that New York is not what it used to be,” said Ada Calhoun, the author of “St. Marks Is Dead” (W.W. Norton, 2015), pointing out that New Yorkers also complained when the street grid was designed in 1811. “Missing a period of time that you weren’t in, or that you were young in, that is an eternal New York story,” she said.
For Mr. Moss, new chapters seem imminent. His apartment building has a new landlord who “has ambitions for the place,” he said. And a developer recently bought the Union Square building where he maintains his therapy office, with plans to redevelop the property. “It’s a horrible feeling to feel like you’re not wanted here, like you’re not valuable,” Mr. Moss said.
Back at Housing Works, though, fans patiently waited in line long after Mr. Moss had finished reading, hoping for a chance to meet him before he was gone.