HONG KONG — The police in Hong Kong said on Tuesday that a pro-democracy activist falsified his account last week of being abducted by men he said were mainland Chinese security officers who put staples in his legs.
The bizarre tale heightened concerns about the deterioration of the rule of law as mainland China’s authoritarian government tries to exert greater influence over the semiautonomous Chinese city of Hong Kong.
The activist, Howard Lam, a member of Hong Kong’s Democratic Party, gave his account to reporters last week and showed rows of staples in his upper thighs that his supporters said were meant as a warning to people who might cross the mainland authorities.
But serious doubts have since been raised about the case. On Tuesday morning, the police arrested Mr. Lam, 42, on suspicion of providing false evidence and misleading investigators.
The police gave no indication of what they believed Mr. Lam’s motivation was.
Mr. Lam said that in early July, he wrote to F.C. Barcelona, the Spanish soccer club, to ask for a signed photograph of the Argentine star Lionel Messi to give to Liu Xiaobo, the imprisoned Chinese Nobel laureate.
Mr. Liu, who had late-stage liver cancer, died before Mr. Lam could give him the photo. He said that he received a call last week from a man speaking Mandarin, a language not much used among Hong Kong’s Cantonese speakers. The man warned him against giving the photo to Liu Xia, Mr. Liu’s widow, who remains under house arrest since her husband’s death.
Mr. Lam claimed that on Thursday, two Mandarin-speaking men approached him as he was shopping and forced him into a van. They knocked him out with a chemical that he was forced to inhale, he said, then took him to a rural area where they beat him and drove staples into his legs. He said he found himself on a remote beach early the next morning.
But FactWire, a local investigative news agency, compiled security video that appeared to show Mr. Lam heading home from shopping on his own, with no signs of a kidnapping.
Mr. Lam told the news agency that the time stamps on the videos were wrong and that he was not the person who appeared in most of the snippets wearing a hat and mask.
Some of Mr. Lam’s supporters said they continued to back him. “I have no reason, or sufficient reason, to change my stance from believing him to misbelieving him,” Albert Ho, the former chairman of the Democratic Party, told RTHK, a local public broadcaster.