Of the 10 plays August Wilson wrote — two of which won him the Pulitzer Prize — nine were based in and around the Hill District in Pittsburgh; he chronicled the city’s changing landscape over decades. He is not the only writer to have chosen the Steel City as a backdrop. Below, one book explores the places that influenced Mr. Wilson’s plays, and two others reimagine Pittsburgh’s people and culture.
146 pp. Pittsburgh History & Landmarks Foundation (2015; second edition).
432 pp. Pantheon Books (1992).
Mr. Wideman is another Pittsburgh native who has set many of his novels and short stories in Homewood, a primarily African-American inner-city neighborhood. This volume brings together three short-story collections, including “Damballah,” the first of what critics call the Homewood books, “Fever” and “All Stories Are True.” "Damballah” begins in Africa and follows the family of John French through slavery and settlement in the North. “All Stories Are True,” on the other hand, contains more autobiographical work, such as “Backseat,” which digs into his family’s past and recounts Wideman’s memories of seeing a former girlfriend when he returns home for his grandmother’s funeral. The stories build upon one another, slowly putting together an image of Mr. Wideman’s Homewood: its churches, street corners and playground basketball courts.
297 pp. William Morrow & Company (1988).
Mr. Chabon’s first novel is a coming-of-age story about Art Bechstein, the son of a gangster who confronts both his family and his sexuality over the course of a summer in Pittsburgh. This exploration is helped along by the materialization of a new group of friends — a woman named Phlox and a gay man named Arthur Lecomte, both of whom become his lovers — and Cleveland, Arthur’s best friend. Art learned about his father’s nefarious business dealings as a teenager and resolved to reject his way of life. Yet “the barrier that stood between my family and my life” is breached when Cleveland begins to be mentored by his father. Mr. Chabon’s writing is elegant and vivid, as are his descriptions of Pittsburgh.