Good morning on this wet Friday.
Emma Lazarus, who wrote a sonnet in 1883 to raise money for the pedestal of the Statue of Liberty, is again the talk of the town.
“Give me your tired, your poor, your huddled masses yearning to breathe free,” she wrote in the poem, which was inscribed on a plaque and mounted inside the monument in 1903.
But to Lazarus, born in New York City, the statue was the Mother of Exiles — a symbol of the United States as a nation of immigrants and opportunity.
To better understand the power of poetry in public discourse, we spoke to immigrant poets who recently participated in the “A New Colossus” poetry festival, organized by the Unterberg Poetry Center of the 92nd Street Y, where poets shared their writings inspired by Lazarus and the themes in her celebrated poem.
Hafizah Geter, 32, a poet in Brooklyn, was born in Zaria, Nigeria, and moved to the United States as a toddler to escape political unrest.
Ms. Geter’s poem, “The Leaving,” explores what it means to be a foreigner in both the life one joins and the life one left behind.
a two-citizen child with no country.
to my blood.
Marcelo Hernandez Castillo, 29, of Marysville, Calif., crossed the United States-Mexico border with his family as an undocumented 5-year-old. His family, once torn apart by his parents’ deportations, is now slowly rebuilding itself in the United States.
“Poetry has always been a vehicle of resistance — during civil wars, during political strife — and people turn to poets for insight,” Mr. Castillo said.
What does Emma Lazarus’s 19th century poem mean to you, in 2017? Share your thoughts with us in the comments.
Perhaps you were awakened not by your alarm, but by the boom of thunderstorms or bright flashes of lightning.
The weather during your morning commute is not looking pretty.
A flood advisory is in effect until midmorning, but then things should clear up a bit, with a high near 85.
Saturday will likely be wet as well, but Sunday’s looking splendid.
• For a global look at what’s happening, see Your Morning Briefing.
• Mets host Dodgers, 7:10 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Indians, 7:10 p.m. (YES). Liberty at Sparks, 10:30 p.m.
• Alternate-side parking remains in effect until August 15.
• Weekend travel hassles: Check subway disruptions and a list of street closings.
• Mets host Dodgers, 4:05 p.m. (SNY). Yankees at Indians, 7:10 p.m. (YES).
• NYC Restaurant Week continues at participating eateries across the city.
• Yankees at Indians, 1:10 p.m. (YES). Mets host Dodgers, 8:08 p.m. (ESPN). Red Bulls vs. New York City F.C., 6 p.m. (FS1).
If you haven’t yet visited Coney Island this summer, you might consider hopping the subway to Stillwell Avenue tomorrow. Saturday is Coney Island History Day.
The celebration, now in its seventh year, is hosted by the Coney Island History Project, a nonprofit dedicated to preserving and sharing the tales of this vibrant slice of Brooklyn.
From noon to 5 p.m. tomorrow (or Sunday, in the event of rain) visitors at Deno’s Wonder Wheel Park can enjoy free music, entertainment, art and history.
Some notable activities: You can dress in period attire to claim a free ride on the Wonder Wheel, which was built in 1920; see a movie inside the 1960s Astroland Rocket; or embark on historical tours of the park — either on your own or with guides from the History Project.
That’s not all, though; check out the rest of the history day events here.
New York Today is a weekday roundup that stays live from 6 a.m. till late morning. If you don’t get it in your inbox already, you can sign up to receive it by email here.
