In the week since President Trump declared that transgender Americans would no longer be allowed in the military, some municipal officials have responded with an invitation: join our police force instead.
Several cities — including Houston; Austin, Tex.; Aurora, Colo.; and Cincinnati — have encouraged transgender people to apply to their police departments. In Austin, San Diego, Seattle and other places, transgender officers already serve openly.
“If you are dismissed from our military because of who you are, know that you are welcome in the city of Cincinnati and our police department,” Chris Seelbach, a city councilman, said at a protest last Wednesday in response to Mr. Trump’s announcement.
Mr. Trump revealed his ban in a series of three tweets from 8:55 to 9:08 a.m. on July 26. By the evening, two cities in Texas — where state lawmakers have been engaged in a high-profile debate over whether transgender people should be allowed to use the public bathrooms of their choice — had declared themselves in opposition to the ban.
Mayor Steve Adler of Austin, a Democrat, posted his own series of three tweets, inviting transgender people dismissed or rejected from the military to apply to the Austin Police Department.
In fact, Austin already has a transgender police officer, Gregory Abbink, and city employees’ insurance covers transgender health care.
Chief Art Acevedo of the Houston Police Department weighed in soon after Mr. Adler.
Across the United States, a series of transgender law enforcement officers have come out in recent years.
Tori Newburn, who came out to his colleagues in 2016, is believed to be the Seattle Police Department’s first openly transgender officer, and Christine Garcia is believed to be the first in the San Diego Police Department. Rebecca Storozuk is an openly transgender sheriff’s deputy in Orange County, Fla., and Jaime Deer is out in King County, Wash., home to Seattle.
Before taking on the top police job in Houston late last year, he led the Austin Police Department for nine years, including the period in which Officer Abbink transitioned.
