María Elena Pombo mines a generation’s favorite fruit for something other than guacamole or a toast topping.
This deceptively simple process is an art form in the hands of Ms. Pombo. The 30-year-old clothing designer from Venezuela is part of a group of millennial makers who work with plant-based dyes, which tend to be more sustainable and make use of vegetable scraps that might otherwise be abandoned. From her studio, on an industrial stretch of Ingraham Street in Brooklyn’s East Williamsburg neighborhood, Ms. Pombo creates exquisite made-to-order clothing dyed with all kinds of organic refuse, including walnut shells, annatto seeds and onion skins. But avocado pits are her main medium.
“Avocado pink is a bit of a mystery,” said Jennifer Gómez Menjívar, an associate professor of Spanish and Latin American studies at the University of Minnesota, Duluth. “What we know about it has been preserved through oral histories.” For example, the Kuna people who have lived in northeastern Panama and the neighboring San Blas Islands since pre-Hispanic times, mention the use of avocado to dye fabrics in their creation story. But traces of alpaca and llama wool dyed with avocado seeds have been unearthed in archaeological sites as well, notably in the Andean highlands where the Aymara and Quechua people have resided.
The outcome was a line of uniform garments, available in linen, silk or a sheer silk-organza-and-cotton blend, that were hand-dyed — down to the button — in a dusty pink shade that calls to mind a bone-dry rose. The garments, which were sold through Instagram, didn’t come cheap: Prices ranged from $300 for a linen shirt to $1,580 for a silk shantung jacket. But Ms. Pombo said that the carefully fabricated pieces are meant to be heirloom items — unique and inheritable. “The idea is to slow down and have a more thoughtful relationship with what we’re consuming,” she said.
The new pieces, all silk and made-to-order, range from $300 for a scarf to $2,200 for a hand-pleated silk organza dress. The silhouettes are similar to her last collection, but this time the diaphanous textiles are ruched and steamed before dyeing, and the shades vacillate between tones of blush, rust and rose. The results look wild, unwieldy and unpredictable, reflecting the variability of different water samples from around the world.
