They tried to warn us about the dangers of OxyContin. Almost two decades later, we’re finally listening.
ROANOKE, Va. — In the beginning, there were just four: the Godfather from Philly, the Army sergeant from Georgia, the professor from California and the feisty mom from Florida.
It was the early 2000s, and they usually talked over old-school computer message boards. Occasionally they gathered in person, carrying posters of their children and middle-aged spouses — all dead from OxyContin overdoses.
Today we know just how dangerous this drug is. Purdue Pharma, the company that made OxyContin, the first extended-release opioid to be widely prescribed, may finally be held to account. Some 200,000 people have died from overdosing on prescription opioids, and around 2,000 lawsuits attempting to make opioid makers and distributors pay for the damage unleashed by careless overprescribing are wending their way through the courts. But experts predict it will take more than $100 billion to turn the crisis around, and it’s hard to feel optimistic when you know the story of how long and hard these four labored in obscurity before anyone listened to them.
The four called themselves RAPP, short for Relatives Against Purdue Pharma, and they testified at hearings, lent support at whistle-blower trials and marched outside pharmaceutical-funded physician meetings at fancy resorts. They were outgunned at every pass — by a pharma-funded phalanx of lawyers and by doctors who had become paid spokesmen for the company. One resort even turned a sprinkler on them. But they picked up new members by the week.
Their leader was Ed Bisch, an I.T. worker from Philadelphia who’d lost his 18-year-old son, Eddie, in 2001. They called him the Godfather because he’d brought them together in the first place, via his website, OxyKills, shortly after Eddie’s death.
Barbara Van Rooyan, a professor of counseling at Folsom Lake College in California until she retired in 2012, told Mr. Bisch recently that finding his website “saved my life and gave me hope that the grief could be used for some good.” Her 24-year-old son, Patrick, died after taking OxyContin at a Fourth of July party in 2004. “It’s kind of like a muscle relaxant, and it’s F.D.A.-approved, so it’s safe,” the friend told Patrick.
The following year, with support from RAPP, Ms. Van Rooyan petitioned the Food and Drug Administration to recall OxyContin until it could be reformulated to make it harder for abusers to crush or dissolve the pills for a more intense high; she also wanted the drug restricted to end-of-life care and to treatment of cancer and other severe pain. It took eight years before the F.D.A. responded by noting that Purdue had voluntarily reformulated the drug in 2010 (so that point was moot), and her restriction petition was denied.
By 2007, RAPP numbered in the hundreds. That August scores of them converged in the rain outside a tiny federal courthouse in Abingdon, Va., because they wanted “to look evil in the face,” as the Florida mother, Lee Nuss, put it. Three of Purdue’s top executives had flown in to be sentenced on misdemeanor misbranding charges. Purdue’s parent company pleaded guilty to a felony misbranding charge, admitting that for six years it had fraudulently marketed OxyContin as being less prone to abuse and having fewer narcotic side effects than competing drugs.
Mr. Vanicky was an Army sergeant in 2000 when he found his 44-year-old wife, Mary Jo, in bed dead after taking OxyContin for a herniated disc. He had just returned home from a yearlong posting in Korea and had never even heard the word OxyContin until the coroner who performed his wife’s autopsy inquired about it.
As she stepped down from the Abingdon witness stand, the Florida mother, Ms. Nuss, brandished a small brass urn containing some of the ashes of her son, Randall, who was 18 when he overdosed on OxyContin. There was a metal detector in the courthouse, and her friends still can’t figure out how she managed to sneak in that urn.
In the end, the company was forced to pay some $634 million in fines. A pittance, compared to the billions it had earned on the drug.
That fine is still the largest paid by Purdue to date, and it would do nothing to slow the epidemic. Not a single executive went to jail, and none of the settlement money went to treatment. OxyContin sales surged in its aftermath, topping $2 billion in 2008.
When Purdue finally reformulated OxyContin to make it abuse-resistant, the pill-addicted switched to heroin and, later, fentanyl to keep their dopesickness at bay. Within another decade, nearly 400,000 people would be dead. More than 2.6 million Americans are now addicted.
Today, the group’s prescience is clear. But they are sad, and they are tired. They still believe the company’s owners, the Sackler family, and executives should go to jail. But more than anything, they want the judges overseeing the lawsuits to make sure Purdue and the family use their riches to guarantee Americans access to treatment.
Recent news of the company’s misdeeds — like the allegation from New York’s attorney general, Letitia James, that Sackler family members moved hundreds of millions of dollars into private or offshore accounts, paying themselves when they knew the company was already insolvent or close to it — only confirms what the four have long believed.
In March, Oklahoma settled its case against Purdue for $270 million — in part because the company was contemplating filing bankruptcy, and the state feared bankruptcy claims would insulate it from paying restitution. That meant all the documents in the case would remain sealed — a fate RAPP laments because it allows the company to hide its tactics from public scrutiny, occluding the dangers of the drug.  He has personally called the offices of many attorneys general to thank them for filing suit against the Sacklers and Purdue.
Now 72, Ms. Nuss keeps busy raising a 10-year-old boy she adopted, one of the many orphans of the opioid crisis. When she travels, she still takes along her son’s urn. Had he lived, Randy would be 35.
Ms. Van Rooyan, now retired from teaching, volunteers her time helping veterans, many with addiction problems, re-enter the work force.
“I was so naïve in the beginning,” he added. Today, none of us can afford to be naïve about the intentions of a drug company — or the ability of government regulators to protect us from those who put profits above the public good.
