Opinion|Who Will Win This Week’s Democratic Debates?
Who Will Win This Week’s Democratic Debates?
Joe Biden is in the hot seat.
It’s crunchtime for the Democratic presidential candidates. The second set of debates will air live from Detroit on Tuesday and Wednesday — with 20 contenders split evenly between the two nights — and the four-hour spectacle is being pitched as an elimination round worthy of “The Bachelorette.” The debates scheduled for September and October have a higher threshold for participation in terms of poll numbers and campaign donations, which means that, among the more marginal candidates, those who fail to distinguish themselves in this showdown might not get another shot.
The candidate with the most on the line isn’t a fringe player like Marianne Williamson or John Delaney. (To review: She’s a self-help guru; he’s a former congressman from Maryland. Do not feel bad if this is the first you’ve heard of them.) Rather, it’s the pack’s front-runner, Joe Biden, slated to appear on Wednesday. The former vice president’s performance in the first round of debates last month was, to put it gently, unsettling. When Senator Kamala Harris went after him on the issue of busing for school integration, Mr. Biden crumbled like a stale cracker — and never fully recovered. With his halting speech and occasionally befuddled demeanor, Mr. Biden didn’t simply leave Democrats questioning whether he can beat President Trump; people across the political spectrum were openly musing about whether he is too old to handle another White House run. When the debate clock ran out on one of his answers, prompting Mr. Biden to mumble, “My time is up. I’m sorry,” the attack ads began writing themselves.
There’s intense pressure on him to obliterate the memory of this stumble. Democrats are desperate for a winner, and Mr. Biden’s core appeal for many is the sense that he is their safest bet — not exciting, or even inspiring, but an experienced, centrist pragmatist unlikely to scare the older, whiter, more moderate, less woke voters whom the party is itching to woo back. If Mr. Biden starts to look risky, for whatever reason, he loses his competitive advantage. The question then becomes: Who can take over the slow-and-steady lane that he has been dominating?
Mr. Biden is hardly an outlier in the Democratic field when it comes to age. Senator Elizabeth Warren is 70. Senator Bernie Sanders is 77. Mike Gravel is 89 — not that most people know he’s in this race.
No, it’s more than age — Mr. Biden’s political identity is also backward-looking. While Mr. Sanders and Ms. Warren are aiming to give America a hard shove forward, Mr. Biden is more about hitting the reset button, taking the nation back to the relative sanity of the pre-Trump era.
Team Biden recognizes that he is not the candidate of the future. Early on, he and his campaign toyed with the idea of positioning him as a one-term place-holder president, a seasoned statesman ready to rescue American democracy from the national emergency that is Donald Trump. As part of this, they were going to do an early rollout of a fresh-faced, dynamic running mate — maybe Kamala Harris or Beto O’Rourke or Stacey Abrams, Georgia’s former House Democratic leader who narrowly lost her race for governor last year. As The Times noted in March, this plan carried potential downsides, including drawing even more attention to Mr. Biden’s age and making him look presumptuous for naming a running mate before a single vote had been cast. Those risks look all the riskier now.
Whatever specific topics Mr. Biden must confront in his debate this week — for instance, he’s expected to clash again with Ms. Harris over racial issues — he’s selling the idea that the nation can move forward from the Trump era by taking a step back. While potentially appealing to those nostalgic for the Obama years, this is a more muddled, less compelling vision than the ones being pitched by some of his primary competitors — not to mention Mr. Trump’s simplistic, revanchist demagogy.
If Mr. Biden does not deliver on Wednesday, the narrative will harden that, as he so unfortunately suggested, his time is indeed up, opening space for some of the second- and third-tier moderates who have been languishing in his shadow. Senators Amy Klobuchar and Michael Bennet, Representative Tim Ryan, Gov. Steve Bullock, former Gov. John Hickenlooper and Mr. Delaney have much to prove this week as well, as they work to sell themselves as the most viable alternative to Mr. Biden. (Centrists who did not make it into this debate round, such as Joe Sestak, the former congressman and retired Navy admiral, will be scrambling for another way to elbow their way into the conversation.) For those whose campaigns have been struggling to gain traction and who are at risk of not making the cut for the next debates, the stakes are especially high.
The energy and excitement of the Democratic Party may be coming from its left flank these days. But in this round of debates, most of the drama is swirling around its lower key, less electrifying moderates. They may not be leading a revolution, but they’re hoping to sell voters on their versions of change nonetheless.