The gap between the rich and the poor in the Democratic presidential primary is growing — and Beto O’Rourke has landed on the worrisome side of the dividing line.
Mr. O’Rourke, who had entered the race in March with the promise of being a top candidate and a financial powerhouse, faltered in dramatic fashion in second-quarter fund-raising, announcing on Monday that he had taken in only $3.6 million. The sum was a fraction of what the front-runners brought in.
In fact, Mr. O’Rourke’s total for the 90-day period was far less than he raised in his first 24 hours as a candidate, when he received $6.1 million.
Mr. O’Rourke’s campaign had sought to brace supporters for the poor showing in the days before it released its figures late Monday.
The latest campaign finance filings show which Democratic presidential candidates gained steam in the money race and who is sputtering.
Mr. O’Rourke’s total placed him solidly outside the group of leading candidates in a field of two dozen Democrats who disclosed the financial state of their campaigns on Monday. The second-quarter hauls affirmed what recent polling has shown: that the race has stratified into clear tiers.
At the top are five candidates who regularly clear 5 percent in the polls, and they are the only ones with second-quarter totals of at least $10 million: Pete Buttigieg, Joseph R. Biden Jr., and Senators Elizabeth Warren, Bernie Sanders and Kamala Harris. Combined they have raised nearly $100 million.
As the midnight deadline for reporting quarterly figures approached Monday, Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey reported a modest total of $4.5 million that placed him at the top of the second tier, followed by Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota, who raised $3.9 million, followed by Mr. O’Rourke.
Several candidates hoping to gain traction announced lower totals that reflected the struggling nature of their campaigns. Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington raised $3 million, Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York took in $2.3 million and former Gov. John Hickenlooper of Colorado raised $1.15 million. All three spent more money than they raised — a troublesome sign this early in the race — as did Mr. O’Rourke, Mr. Booker and Ms. Klobuchar.
Money is the lifeblood of political campaigns, allowing candidates to travel, hire staff and pay for advertising. Poor fund-raising totals can create a vicious cycle where donors, both big and small, cut back on their giving, threatening a contender’s ability to advance to primaries and caucuses that are still months away. Add to that the threshold of 130,000 donors needed to make the September debate, and a lack of financing could sharply cull the field of two-dozen within months.
For now, the money chase is being paced by Mr. Buttigieg, the 37-year-old mayor of South Bend, Ind., who was virtually unknown only a few months ago. He raised $24.8 million in the last quarter. Mr. Buttigieg has emerged as the surprise fund-raising star of the cycle, a favorite both of major bundlers who collect $2,800 contributions and of small donors who give $200 or less (Mr. Buttigieg counts more than 400,000 contributors so far).
Following him were Mr. Biden, the former vice president; ($21.5 million); Ms. Warren ($19.1 million); Mr. Sanders ($18 million); and Ms. Harris (nearly $12 million).
Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders, two of the most outspoken progressives in the contest, have rejected high-dollar fund-raisers and rely almost exclusively on small donors and those who give online. That strategy helped Mr. Sanders become a financial juggernaut in his 2016 run, but Ms. Warren notably surpassed him last quarter, after he had tripled her haul in the first quarter.
While Democrats are raising millions for an intensifying primary between each other, President Trump and the Republican National Committee announced Monday that they had already banked a staggering $123 million for the 2020 campaign.
One of the biggest mysteries of the quarterly filing period had been the haul for Mr. O’Rourke. Political insiders have whispered for weeks that he would report a depressed figure, signaling just how much momentum has diminished for the former Texas congressman since March.
The result was worse than even most had expected, and far less than the $9.4 million he raised over 18 days in the first quarter.
While Mr. O’Rourke shattered fund-raising records as a Senate candidate running against the Republican Senator Ted Cruz in 2018 — he raised $80 million — he has found tougher sledding competing against his fellow Democrats.
Some of the senior advisers from his 2018 Senate run have departed, and a new team being run by Ms. O’Malley Dillon is still being constructed in El Paso, his hometown. Ms. Dillon did not join Mr. O’Rourke until after he had already announced, which is unusual for presidential campaigns.
While some candidates had assembled what amounted to campaigns-in-waiting as far back as 2018, Mr. O’Rourke is still building out the top level of his operation; a national press secretary and a national policy director only came on board in recent weeks.
And while Ms. Harris, Mr. Biden and Mr. Buttigieg have kept up a particularly aggressive schedule of high-dollar fund-raisers with $1,000 entry prices, Mr. O’Rourke has only held a handful of such events — and had held none until halfway through the quarter. Mr. O’Rourke recently named his first national finance director, and on Monday his campaign invited donors to a New York event next week.
Mr. O’Rourke inherited a massive list of past supporters from his Senate race, which he leveraged to long ago fulfill the Democratic National Committee’s 130,000-donor requirement for the third set of debates — a threshold that Mr. Booker, Ms. Klobuchar and Ms. Gillibrand still have not met.
“I benefit from a system that my ancestors built to favor themselves at the expense of others,” he wrote in a note that appeared timed to get ahead of the publication of an article in The Guardian about his ancestry.
The campaigns’ finance reports also detail spending. Ms. Gillibrand spent $4.2 million — nearly $2 million more than she raised. But she still had $8.2 million in the bank as of July 1, thanks to money she had previously transferred from her past Senate races.
Julián Castro, the former housing secretary, spent $2.3 million and was on track to spend more than he raised until the first debate. He raised $1.1 million in the next four days, boosting his total to $2.8 million.
There do not appear to be enough big or small donors to support all the Democratic candidates financially. Already, one candidate, Representative Eric Swalwell of California, has dropped out. Another, Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, reported raising less than $900,000 — far less than needed to run a viable national campaign. Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York raised only $1.1 million.
Other candidates who have announced their fund-raising totals include Senator Michael Bennet of Colorado ($2.8 million), the entrepreneur Andrew Yang ($2.8 million) and Gov. Steve Bullock of Montana ($2 million).