The face of professional lacrosse is bearded and chiseled, a look tailor-made for drawing fans on Instagram and YouTube. It belongs to Paul Rabil, who has long been considered the kind of athlete who could take his sport into the mainstream.
Now, Rabil finally has that chance — both as a player and co-founder of a new league changing the dynamics of pro lacrosse.
Rabil, 33, once held the points record for Major League Lacrosse, which had been North America’s top outdoor lacrosse league. That was until Rabil and his brother, Mike, started the Premier Lacrosse League, which began play last month with 160 players, including many M.L.L. All-Stars and members of the United States national team. The new league will have its All-Star Game on Sunday in Los Angeles.
Is there demand for such an enterprise? Why would so many players abandon a league two decades old to come along with the Rabils?
The answer is that for most players, professional lacrosse has been a grind, even though they play a rapidly growing sport in front of affluent crowds. Even a star might barely earn $50,000 a year in salary, similar to the average pro football or basketball player in the 1930s or ’40s — when the college version of those sports overshadowed the pro one, much like lacrosse today.
Now Rabil wants to let others enjoy what he has — the chance to make a living just from the sport.
Most of the pros believe in Rabil, who is offering an average $35,000 in salary for the 14-week season, plus benefits and equity stakes, along with a national TV deal. The P.L.L., Rabil said, will have year-round paid opportunities for its players as well, such as in the P.L.L. Academy, which puts on lacrosse clinics, and at smaller exhibitions and tours.
The migration of players from the M.L.L. to the P.L.L. includes 115 former college all-Americans, 12 college player of the year winners and 10 pro most valuable players.
Money has followed Rabil, too, with the P.L.L. securing financial backing from several big investors. League officials declined to say how much has been staked, but the investments are generally based on the expectation of a return in 10 years.
Many investors have lacrosse backgrounds. Joe Tsai, a founder of Alibaba Group and an owner of the Brooklyn Nets, played at Yale. David O’Connor, a former managing partner of Creative Artists Agency, played at Dartmouth.
The 6-foot-3, 220-pound Rabil has done more on the field than perhaps any other player of his generation: in college, a two-time national champion and four-time all-American at Johns Hopkins; in the M.L.L. and the indoor National Lacrosse League, a three-time champion, two-time M.V.P. and 12-time All-Star; internationally, a World Lacrosse Championship winner and M.V.P.
Rabil’s business career began more modestly. After graduating in 2008, he lived in his parents’ Maryland basement and analyzed commercial real estate four days a week; he trained before work and played over long weekends. He later started a camp and clinic business, using a small endorsement from Under Armour. He was becoming something rare: a full-time lacrosse player.
Rabil dived into social media before most athletes realized its potential, using Facebook’s athlete and business pages to connect to a rabid fan base. A successful YouTube channel followed, and he soon had more than 700,000 followers across all platforms. Major sponsors signed him, and Rabil soon became the first in his sport to earn more than $1 million annually.
He also pursued other business dealings with his brother Mike, who played football at Dartmouth. They formed an investment company in 2013 that was eventually bought out by the British lender Funding Circle, sending Mike to Silicon Valley while Paul stayed in New York as a star of the M.L.L.’s Lizards.
The Rabils revisited lacrosse as a potential project, as the sport tailed off professionally even as it boomed at the amateur levels.
The brothers explored ownership with the M.L.L., but the negotiations broke off. So they decided if they were going to chase their vision, they needed to start anew.
Their new league’s first priority was to let players devote themselves to lacrosse full time. The P.L.L. would provide full-time wages, health insurance and equity in the league, none of which were offered by the M.L.L. Rabil wanted players to do their own branding, just as he had for himself. The P.L.L. would give players access to their photo and video highlights, ready to be uploaded to their social media profiles.
The Rabils secured a multiyear deal with NBC Sports for live broadcasts of every game through one of its platforms, with the media company paying for production. The Rabils want to attract new fans to lacrosse in a way that has worked for mixed martial arts, with a documentary series to teach viewers about the sport.
Matthew Cacciato, a former sports media distribution executive with ESPN, Fox Sports and YES Network, said the P.L.L.’s goals for growth are reasonable given its working capital, social media presence and modest TV audience.
“I am also aware of at least two P.L.L. franchise owners waiting in the wings,” said Cacciato, director of Ohio University’s master’s program in sports administration.
The P.L.L. will cap its season on Sept. 21 in suburban Philadelphia, when it will crown a champion and declare a most valuable player with an award named for Jim Brown, a Hall of Fame football and lacrosse player who was an all-American at Syracuse in lacrosse.
Perhaps, by then, the future of the pro sport will come into focus.