Kamala Harris gets a bump after the debates, Pete Buttigieg raises $24.8 million and Cory Booker unveils an immigration overhaul.
An immediate consensus emerged among pundits and the political class after the first Democratic presidential debates: Senator Kamala Harris of California had performed exceedingly well; former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. not so much.
Three polls released this week suggested that voters agreed.
The polls — two were national surveys, and one polled Iowa caucusgoers — all showed Ms. Harris vaulting into second place behind Mr. Biden. They also showed a dip in support for Mr. Biden, though more than one in five respondents still said he was their first choice.
The results also affirmed a broader trend: Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts has gained ground as Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont has fallen back. Ms. Warren remained solidly in the top tier, finishing third in all three polls. Mr. Sanders, who led several polls before Mr. Biden entered the race, finished fourth in each of them.
For a closer look at the numbers, read our story on the polls.
We also published an analysis of who might be cut from the July debates.
And, yes, we know telephone surveys seem antiquated. But are online polls the answer?
Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., was first out of the gate on Monday, in no small part because his numbers were impressive. His campaign announced that he had collected $24.8 million from more than 294,000 donors over the three-month period.
The next day, Mr. Sanders’s campaign announced he had raised $18 million.
On Wednesday, Mr. Biden’s campaign said he had raised $21.5 million since entering the race in late April.
And on Friday, Ms. Harris’s campaign released less-stellar numbers, just under $12 million for the quarter.
Here are our stories on the fund-raising efforts by Mr. Buttigieg, Mr. Sanders, Mr. Biden and Ms. Harris.
And here is a single page where we are keeping track of fund-raising figures for all the candidates.
One more thing to keep in mind: President Trump’s re-election campaign and the Republican National Committee announced enormous fund-raising numbers — $105 million in the second quarter.
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey announced a plan Tuesday to drastically alter the nation’s immigration detention system through an executive order on his first day in office.
Mr. Booker’s platform establishes new standards for facilities operated by the Department of Homeland Security and directs the department to phase out contracts with private prison facilities and county or local prisons.
Restoring protections for young immigrants known as Dreamers under the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program.
Reforming bond requirements for detained immigrants.
Ending the Trump administration’s restrictions on immigration from predominantly Muslim countries.
Halting all construction and expenditures on Mr. Trump’s border wall and removing some sections.
Mr. Buttigieg, who has struggled to gain the support of black voters, promised Tuesday to enact a series of policies to address systemic racism. Specifically, he said he would work to improve police training, create a federal fund for investment in minority-owned businesses, abolish private federal prisons and ban incarceration for simple drug possession.
The next day, he proposed a major expansion of voluntary public service programs. The plan calls for expanding existing national service organizations like the Peace Corps and adding new ones. It aims to attract 250,000 Americans initially and potentially grow to one million members.
Representative Tim Ryan unveiled an education plan that calls for a $50 billion investment in the nation’s public schools. Under Mr. Ryan’s proposal, reinvigorated public schools would serve as community hubs that offer meals, mental health services, before- and after-school programs and more.
Former Representative John Delaney of Maryland released a four-part “Opioid Epidemic Plan.” It includes a requirement for doctors to ensure that patients understand the addictive nature of opioids.
Senator Kirsten Gillibrand of New York rolled out her plan “to protect our democracy and tackle corruption in Washington.” It includes steps like making voter registration automatic and making Election Day a federal holiday.
Ms. Warren proposed requirements for federal contractors that she said would help increase wages for women of color and open pathways to leadership positions.
And on Friday, Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington both released education proposals. Ms. Klobuchar called for new “Progress Partnerships,” which would provide incentives for states to increase teacher pay, adapt high school curriculums and adjust funding formulas to improve equity.
Mr. Booker went to Ciudad Juárez, Mexico, on Wednesday and escorted five migrant women across the border to apply for asylum. Immigration lawyers who accompanied him said the women, who had previously crossed the border and been sent back to Mexico to await their court dates, had been sexually assaulted.
The next day, in Iowa, a conservative blogger made a racist comment to Mr. Buttigieg, who has been facing a leadership test after a South Bend police officer fatally shot a black man.
