The mother of Amadou Diallo became an activist after his death in New York. The Eric Garner case brings painful reminders.
In the months after her son was killed in the Bronx by four police officers, she was consumed by grief each time she walked the unfamiliar streets of New York City. She wept often.
But now, 20 years after that life-altering event, the woman, Kadiatou Diallo, no longer dreads visits to the city. She comes to New York at least once a year to advance her charity and advocacy work or to spend time with and give guidance to other mothers who have also lost children in law enforcement-related incidents — a support system she didn’t have two decades ago.
On Tuesday, Ms. Diallo paused for a few seconds during a telephone interview after she was told the breaking news that the Department of Justice would not prosecute a New York City police officer accused of killing Eric Garner five years ago in Staten Island.
Ms. Diallo recalled the infamous video showing Mr. Garner being put in a chokehold by Officer Daniel Pantaleo during his arrest and uttering the phrase, “I can’t breathe,” 11 times before his death.
It was a painful reminder of what she had experienced.
On Feb. 4, 1999, her son, Amadou Diallo, was killed in the vestibule of a Bronx apartment building by four New York Police Department officers who had been searching for a suspect in a rape case. The officers — who fired a total of 41 shots — said they believed Mr. Diallo, 23, had reached to grab a gun when they approached him. Instead, Mr. Diallo had grabbed for his wallet.
The president of the N.A.A.C.P. at the time, Kweisi Mfume, called the shooting, “excessive force at its worst.” Mr. Diallo’s death led to numerous protests in the city, resulting in a politically fraught time for former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani.
Nearly 14 years before the start of the Black Lives Matter movement, Mr. Diallo’s death became the rallying cry for those who believed the Police Department operated with racial bias.
Ms. Diallo arrived into this tense environment from Guinea five days after her son was killed. She cried his name while being helped to the crime scene by the authorities. She was immediately immortalized in New York newspapers and on television and computer screens. She toured the country with the Rev. Al Sharpton, decrying police brutality.
But Ms. Diallo soon appeared hesitant to become a symbol for a narrative she did not totally understand.
She had a reported rift with Mr. Sharpton, partly regarding who would represent her in a lawsuit against the city and the officers. The pressure on her to fight for a larger cause was immense. Ms. Diallo just wanted to move on, heal and seek reconciliation with the mayor and the Police Department.
Instead, she started the Amadou Diallo Foundation.
The four officers involved in the shooting were indicted almost two months after the shooting. But in February 2000, a jury acquitted them of all charges.
Ms. Diallo and her ex-husband received a $3 million settlement in 2004 to their lawsuit against the city and the officers. Ms. Diallo was given half.
After the settlement, she completed a memoir, “My Heart Will Cross This Ocean,” built a school in her son’s name in Guinea and ran the foundation.
In the 20 years since her son’s killing, Ms. Diallo has become the type of leader many had wanted her to be in the months after the shooting, and she’s done it with little or no publicity. She’s also mended her relationship with Mr. Sharpton.
She has also befriended people like Gwen Carr, Mr. Garner’s mother. Ms. Diallo said on Tuesday that she planned to call her to offer support.
“I know what Gwen is going to tell me: ‘Kadi, I’m ready to fight this. I cannot give up,’” Ms. Diallo said.
Ms. Diallo is also involved with the Justice Committee, a New York grass-roots advocacy group. One of its efforts is a campaign urging Gov. Andrew M. Cuomo to sign an executive order to appoint a special prosecutor to handle cases like Mr. Garner’s.
Ms. Diallo attended Mr. Garner’s funeral in 2014, but personally met Ms. Carr later that year at Riverside Church in Harlem, when both women were on a panel. Ms. Carr, in an interview earlier this year, said she felt “a real connection” to Ms. Diallo immediately, and that they have talked every week since.
Ms. Carr said she appreciated Ms. Diallo’s presence after her son’s death. “I was in a dark place,” she said.
Ms. Carr said she vividly remembered following the news of Mr. Diallo’s death and its aftermath, watching and reading about how Ms. Diallo navigated the chaotic time.
Ms. Diallo runs her foundation on her own, though a consultant helps to organize an annual fund-raiser.
Ms. Diallo was in New York earlier this year to preside over the first three scholarships awarded by her foundation to students at Guttman Community College in Midtown Manhattan who plan to pursue computer-related careers, just as Amadou had hoped to do.
Ms. Diallo said she has never felt “revengeful” toward the police.
“Let’s move forward in one direction and fight for this good fight so we can save the children. That was my mission,” said Ms. Diallo, who has a daughter and two other grown sons, and is a grandmother of three.
