Iran is the highest-ranked soccer team in Asia, a position that underlines the Middle Eastern country’s status as a regional favorite to qualify for the 2022 World Cup, to be held in nearby Qatar.
Thousands of Iranians are expected to make the short journey to cheer on their team, just as they did when the tournament was held in Brazil in 2014, and in Russia last year. Many were women who live in Iran, yet are prohibited from attending men’s soccer matches in their home country.
Iran’s biggest obstacle to qualifying for the World Cup may be off the field, because a campaign to change that prohibition is getting louder. The campaign’s leaders, including the sister of Iran’s team captain, are asking FIFA to ban Iran from World Cup qualifying unless the country changes the law.
The women leading the movement say they share the same passion as male fans for Team Melli, as the men’s national team is known, yet believe only a serious threat of exclusion from the World Cup by FIFA will lead to the end of a prohibition that has lasted for four decades.
Gianni Infantino, the president of FIFA, wrote a letter last month to Mehdi Taj, the president of Iran’s soccer federation, asking him to provide an answer no later than July 15 about what “concrete steps” the federation would take to ensure that Iranian women could attend World Cup qualification games, which start in September. The deadline passed Monday without a response.
So far, FIFA has shown little appetite for penalizing Iran for a violation the organization describes as against its “most basic principles.” Should it finally act, the consequences could be personal for Shojaei. Her brother Masoud Soleimani Shojaei is the team’s captain, a national hero who has appeared in three World Cup tournaments for Iran.
Identifying herself publicly for the first time as the Iranian captain’s sister, Shojaei, a Canadian citizen, said she began her campaign after she saw the popularity of the Iranian national team among women at the 2014 World Cup. She said her protests have nothing to do with her brother. She did not tell him that she had traveled to Russia, where she protested at the 2018 World Cup as the founder of My Fundamental Right. Separately, Masoud Shojaei has spoken out about the issue at home.
The lack of progress is embarrassing for Infantino, who attended a game in Tehran in November 2018 with senior Iranian officials. For that game, Iran lifted the prohibition, allowing a few hundred women to attend. Infantino described the event as a momentous sign of progress, while activists described it as a stunt, no more than an exercise designed to fool a credulous foreign dignitary.
Shojaei said she told FIFA’s secretary general, Fatma Samoura, ahead of the game that the Iranians would use Infantino’s appearance at the game at Tehran’s Azadi Stadium to put on a “show.” She also presented Samoura with a petition that had more than 200,000 signatures.
FIFA declined to comment.
Infantino’s letter expressed alarm at incidents surrounding an exhibition game between Iran and Syria on June 6, just a day before the start of the Women’s World Cup. Women trying to attend the game were detained by security for several hours, including some who claimed they were beaten.
Other campaigns to lift the ban on women predate the efforts by Shojaei, who in April put her name to a complaint against the Iranian federation that was submitted to FIFA’s ethics committee. The committee is notorious for operating with little transparency.
Another longtime campaigner, who has fought against the restrictions on women for 15 years, managed to watch Iran for the first time by traveling to the World Cup in Russia. The woman, who uses the name Sara to conceal her real identity for fear of arrest, said she, too, believed FIFA must act decisively rather than merely speak out.
Of the more than 20 women who started the campaign, now called Open Stadiums, Sara is the only one to remain in Iran. The rest, she said, fled the country.
“It should be based on statute that they suspend the federation,” Sara said.
Last March, while Infantino was in the company of Iranian officials, Sara protested with three dozen female soccer fans and activists by trying to enter the Azadi — some while dressed as men — for the biggest match in the country, a showdown between the clubs Persepolis and Esteghlal that was watched by as many as 100,000 men. The protesters were arrested and detained for several hours.
The movement to lift the stadium ban has gained a nationwide following, becoming part of the larger conversation about women’s rights in the conservative Muslim country. In its earliest days, even many Iranian feminists dismissed the movement.
“If someone asked me, ‘What’s your biggest achievement, what gives you the most satisfaction?’ I would say this: ‘The ayatollahs when they’re talking about women’s rights, they are always talking about women attending stadiums,’” Sara said.
Shojaei, who moved to Canada in 2007 and became a citizen in 2012, has had her banners confiscated while overseas, including in Russia, where FIFA, which has adopted a new human rights guidelines, had provided express permission for her to attend with its delegation.
“I talked to two well-respected clergy, and they said it’s nothing to do with Islam,” she said.
The ban, which has been extended to volleyball and basketball, provides a stark contrast with other cultural arenas in Iran, including theaters, where people of different genders freely mix.
But in a country hobbled by sanctions, the successful soccer team has unmatched popularity, with millions of fans tuning in when Team Melli takes the field.
That popularity, said Shojaei, means the threat of a ban from World Cup qualifiers would most likely lead to the lifting of a ban that went into effect not long after the 1979 Iranian Revolution.
