BERLIN — A woman who kills her own children. A man who marries his mother. A king who is ordered to sacrifice his son.
The festival’s artistic director, Markus Hinterhäuser, now entering his third season, found himself inspired by ancient myths to create a narrative framework or “navigation system” for the sprawling festival, he said, which includes five new opera stagings, 81 concerts and four new spoken theater productions. In past programs, he delved into the topics of power and passion.
The “Idomeneo” production will grapple at once with the aftermath of war, the effects of global warming and the eagerness of the next generation to take matters into their own hands. In Homer’s original story, the king of Crete, Idomeneus, is ordered by the sea god, Neptune, to sacrifice his son, Idamante. But when Ilia, a Trojan princess and war prisoner, offers her life instead, the oracle declares that Idamante will inherit the throne and marry her.
The opera’s culmination in a ballet sequence, to be choreographed by the Samoan-born Lemi Ponifasio, represents for Mr. Sellars “a gesture to stop talking, time for action.” One of two dancers is from the island nation of Kiribati, which is threatened by rising sea levels.
The Felsenreitschule will also be home to a new production of Enescu’s “Oedipe,” staged by the veteran director Achim Freyer. The libretto follows the life of Oedipus from his birth and, in a twist of the original myth, a grove where he vanishes in a flash of flight. The score, meanwhile, is a unique blend of neo-classical elements, Eastern European folklore and French harmonies.
In the tradition of Gerard Mortier, who led the festival from 1991 to 2001, Mr. Hinterhäuser has made it a priority to cultivate underperformed works of the 20th century. But Mr. Hinterhäuser, who is a pianist and founder of the modern music series Zeitfluss, which ran under Mortier’s aegis, gives living composers their due.
A series in the Kollegienkirche (Collegiate Church) from July 25 to Aug. 6 will revisit the oeuvre of Pascal Dusapin, who has written several stage works based on Greek myth. In the composer’s “Medeamaterial,” a setting of the Heiner Müller adaptation of the myth of Medea, the soprano’s vocal lines reveal “a state of permanent divide, a total schizophrenia,” he said by phone from Paris.
“That’s a wonderful and terrible metaphor for the modern world,” he said.
The program also includes some comic relief with Offenbach’s “Orphée aux enfers” (Orpheus in the Underworld), a biting satire of the original myth that marks the composer’s bicentenary. The director Barrie Kosky — known for his flamboyant operetta productions at the Komische Oper Berlin — makes his Salzburg debut.
And the opera lineup would not be complete without the mezzo-soprano Cecilia Bartoli, who appears as the title character of Handel’s “Alcina” in a Damiano Michieletto production first seen in June at Salzburg’s Whitsun Festival (where Ms. Bartoli is artistic director). She views the parable of the sorceress, who loses her magical powers after falling for the knight Ruggiero, as an expression about love but also societal pressures to maintain eternal youth.
