Mr. Trump’s attack on Representative Elijah E. Cummings, a Democrat from Maryland and leading critic of the president, parroted a segment that aired earlier in the morning on “Fox & Friends.” The president suggested that the congressman was a hypocrite for criticizing conditions in migrant detention centers at the southwestern border when his own district is blighted. Mr. Trump also made a vague and unsubstantiated insinuation of corruption.
Mr. Trump’s blasts could revive the criticism that followed his attacks on four first-term Democratic congresswomen of color, who he angrily declared should “go back” to their home countries, even though three of them were born in the United States and the fourth is also an American citizen. The president’s use of racist tropes generated enormous anger on the part of Democrats and some Republicans, leading the House to pass a resolution, largely along party lines, condemning his remarks.
The video was shot by Kimberly Klacik, a Republican strategist from Baltimore who is African-American and was interviewed on the segment assailing Mr. Cummings. She later rejected the idea that criticism of him and how he represents his district was racist.
Mr. Cummings’s district is 53 percent African-American, according to the census, and includes much of Baltimore as well as vast suburban stretches. Baltimore has struggled with crime in recent years, recording more murders in 2017 than any other city of at least 500,000 residents — and more even than New York, a vastly larger city.
When Representative John Lewis, a Democrat from Georgia considered a hero of the civil rights era, said he would not attend Mr. Trump’s inauguration in January 2017, the incoming president said that the congressman “should spend more time on fixing and helping his district, which is in horrible shape and falling apart.” Mr. Trump disparaged Haiti and African nations last year using vulgar language, asking why the United States should want immigrants from them.
Mr. Cummings has been one of the president’s most persistent critics in Congress. Only two days ago, he was authorized by his oversight committee to subpoena work-related text and emails sent on personal accounts by White House officials, including Mr. Trump’s daughter and son-in-law.
The Maryland congressman has also assailed the administration’s handling of the border. At a recent hearing, Mr. Cummings confronted Kevin McAleenan, the acting secretary of homeland security, about conditions for detained migrants, sharply criticizing the secretary’s contention that his department was doing its “level best” to manage the situation.
Mr. Trump did not explain one of his most explosive charges, that federal taxpayer money was somehow being stolen, nor did he detail what involvement he was suggesting on Mr. Cummings’s part.
White House officials did not immediately respond to requests for clarification. A spokesman for Mr. Cummings had no comment and referred to the congressman’s Twitter posts.