By 18, Emma Chamberlain had dropped out of school and changed the world of online video.
Emma Chamberlain, 18, is the funniest person on YouTube. What does she do? So far the content of her videos has not been the point: She makes cupcakes, or tries her hand at sewing. Like Phoebe Waller-Bridge of “Fleabag,” an artist close to twice her age, she interrupts the proceedings constantly to speak to her audience. That’s where her videos actually happen.
Growing up now means that you watch a lot of videos, and make them as well. Chamberlain filmed videos for school — in religion and math classes, videos were required — and for fun.
During her sophomore year of high school, a few of Chamberlain’s friends began combing SoundCloud for trap rap remixes of Christmas music. They would find the funniest song they could and make up a jokey dance routine for it and film it. Chamberlain would edit videos during fourth period and post them on a private Instagram.
One of the early videos Chamberlain posted on her private friends-and-family Instagram — her finsta — was her reaction to a take-home chemistry test. She was one of the younger students in a very rigorous class. They were assigned an online test. Chamberlain spent three hours on it, but when she pressed submit, the website glitched and her completed test was lost. She found out later that everybody else in her class had found an answer key online.
She started filming herself right when she learned that the test had been deleted. She was sobbing.  She reacted by turning a camera on.
Chamberlain stopped enjoying high school toward the end of her sophomore year in 2017. She had been working unceasingly, with college in mind. Socially, she said, her values didn’t align with some students at her school, who seemed to take things for granted. “Not only things like money, but also, like, morals,” she said.
“Less than a week later, she was like, ‘I want to start a YouTube channel,’” he said.
It’s been two years. Chamberlain now has 8 million YouTube followers. She brought in the editing tricks that first set her friends and family rolling on the floor, but now they take longer to perfect.
She’s training herself for long-distance editing. “I’ve actually gotten to a point now where I feel like I’m really, really mentally strong and I don’t really lose my marbles as often,” she said.
In May of 2020, she will turn 19.
Over these two years, Chamberlain invented the way people talk on YouTube now, particularly the way they communicate authenticity. Her editing tricks and her mannerisms are ubiquitous. There is an entire subgenre of videos that mimic her style, and a host of YouTubers who talk, or edit, just like her. The Atlantic recently noted this and declared she is “the most important YouTuber” working today.
When someone introduces a new vocabulary to a medium, they don’t have much say in who uses it and who doesn’t.
Chamberlain’s parents have supported her unconventional choices, like dropping out of school in the beginning of her junior year and moving to Los Angeles to live by herself while still a teenager. She says that they were and are her best friends.
Both of them worry about her working too hard.
In June 2018, Chamberlain left the Bay Area to live alone in L.A. and fully immerse herself in YouTubeland.
Professional YouTubers are the children of reality television. The dramas of their videos are often inextricable from their lives. When Jake Paul and Tana Mongeau, two famous YouTubers, said they were engaged last month, it was impossible for fans to parse whether they were telling the truth. It barely mattered. This is what celebrities are now, when they’re not the dinosaurs left over from what used to be called the monoculture.
YouTubers tend to bond and/or feud with one another constantly, because this is social media as much as it is performance art. They recreate the overheated dynamics of the high school environment that Chamberlain wanted to escape.
“It’s weird because I left high school to get out of that B.S. and now here we are in L.A., where it’s almost worse,” she said.
Viewers try to enact drama on her. They speculate about which YouTuber she’s dating, or which friends she’s on the outs with. They worry about or criticize how she looks. Some declare her fake, because she’s been doing content with advertisers.
It also differs from high school in socially advantageous ways. For one thing, now she has the ability to remove herself, respectfully, from situations, or friendships, that are dramatic or unpleasant.
“If somebody has a bad reputation on the internet or if they have a really good reputation on the internet, I don’t care. I want to meet said person and make up my mind for myself, and then go from there,” she said.
Chamberlain also makes good money. SocialBlade, a social media analytics firm, estimates that from her videos alone she makes at least $120,000 a year, and perhaps as much as $2 million. Sponsor deals with Hollister and Louis Vuitton are another revenue stream.
Chamberlain’s most popular videos tend to be collaborations, which tap the strength of multiple audiences like any crossover event. She has appeared several times with Ethan and Grayson Dolan, two well-known YouTuber twins. Gossip has followed.
In one video from June, Chamberlain and the Dolans pretended to be studying for high school finals, playing with the stereotype of YouTubers as stupid slackers and praising students who might be studying for real.
Chamberlain has now decided upon a new approach. “I’m just going to not stick to one thing so strictly,” she said.
Her recent videos are less jittery, less edited. She has been trying to let her narrative and her scripts speak, with fewer interruptions than before.
Recently, she has tried anthologies and also stunts, like spending 24 hours on the balcony of her house. She thinks those videos have been different, and that she has, to some degree, broken out of the box she made for herself.
The balcony stunt, for instance, she said, was one of the more emotionally challenging things she had ever done for video. She said that the more she puts into what she makes, the less she has to do to make the video work in the edit.
