SAN JUAN, P.R. — Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló of Puerto Rico announced his resignation on Wednesday night, conceding that he could no longer credibly remain in power after an extraordinary popular uprising and looming impeachment proceedings had derailed his administration.
In a statement posted online just before midnight, Mr. Rosselló, 40, said he would step down on Aug. 2.
He said his successor for the moment would be the secretary of justice, Wanda Vázquez, a former district attorney who once headed the island’s office of women’s affairs. Ms. Vázquez was next in line under the commonwealth’s Constitution because the secretary of state, who would have succeeded Mr. Rosselló as governor, resigned last week when he also was caught up in a chat scandal that enveloped the administration.
But the governor appeared to leave open the possibility that a different successor could be in place by the time he steps down.
His ouster by popular demand meant more to Puerto Ricans than a rejection of Mr. Rosselló’s administration. It amounted to a resounding repudiation of decades of mismanagement and decline that everyday people blamed on politicians in San Juan and Washington.
Mr. Rosselló began his announcement by citing some of the accomplishments of his administration, including passing a balanced budget with no layoffs of public employees, fighting corruption, establishing positive economic growth and lowering taxes. “We raised the salary of teachers in the middle of a bankruptcy,” he said.
In an address broadcast on television and Facebook, Mr. Rosselló said he would resign effective Aug. 2.
Appointment and confirmation of a new secretary of state could mean that person might also be tapped to succeed Mr. Rosselló.
The governor’s announcement came only hours after the leader of the Puerto Rico House, Carlos J. Méndez Núñez, said lawmakers were planning to convene impeachment proceedings on Thursday. He said there were sufficient votes to oust the governor.
Mr. Rosselló is the first chief executive to step down during a term since Puerto Ricans started electing their governors in 1947. Until earlier this week, he had been expected to seek re-election in 2020.
Mr. Rosselló’s remarkable downfall followed more than a week of fervent public protests demanding his exit and a day of anxious anticipation on Wednesday. He had been expected to step down in the morning, but the announcement dragged on for hours amid a frenzy of rumors and speculation.
Even as the governor dug in his heels, it became increasingly difficult for him to hang on. Both his chief of staff and the person in charge of the island’s Federal Affairs Administration in Washington resigned on Tuesday. The chief of staff said he could no longer take threats directed at his family, and the Washington representative said the latest developments were contrary to his principles.
Hours later, a top donor to the party posted a letter on Twitter asking Mr. Rosselló to resign.
The governor and his wife tried furiously through the week to give the impression that it was business as usual: The first lady posted online photographs of her visit to a women’s shelter on Monday, only to have the shelter directors come out publicly the next day and ask her to take the pictures down. The governor posted photos of staff meetings as protesters rallied angrily in the streets.
The scandal took on potential criminal overtones on Tuesday when the Puerto Rico Department of Justice confirmed that search warrants had been executed, seizing the cellphones of several people who participated in the chat.
The Puerto Rico Bar Association issued a report suggesting that seven potential crimes had been revealed in the chat, including an implied threat against the mayor of San Juan, Carmen Yulín Cruz, as well as possible instances of diversion of funds, conspiracy, disclosure of private information and intention to terminate employment based on political beliefs.
But the clamor in the streets went deeper than the chat: Puerto Ricans said they had had enough after years of financial mismanagement and the poor government response to Hurricane Maria, which ravaged Puerto Rico, a United States commonwealth, nine months after Mr. Rosselló took office in 2017. The government initially downplayed the death toll but was later forced to admit that an estimated 3,000 people had died.
Anger at such tone-deaf exchanges united Puerto Ricans of all stripes, including many who had never protested before. Popular musicians rallied millions of fans on social media. The artists known as Residente, iLe and Bad Bunny produced a protest song, “Afilando los Cuchillos” (“Sharpening the Knives”), that became a street anthem. Hundreds of thousands of Puerto Ricans escalated the uprising on Monday by shutting down a major highway in San Juan.
Protesters had gathered on Tuesday night outside the mansion to listen to a public reading of the Puerto Rican Constitution, cheering, chanting and dancing to the steady beat of snare drums. Those who did not have drums banged on pots and pans.
Alejandro Santiago Calderón, 30, said the release of the text exchanges confirmed what many Puerto Ricans had suspected about the governor and his political allies — that they held disdain for the public. Like many others, he said the governor’s resignation would not be enough to quell his sense that the island’s political establishment needed to be shaken up.
“This has to change, and it has to change from the top all the way to the bottom,” he said.
The stunning events that led to Mr. Rosselló’s ouster felt like a turning point after Puerto Ricans had endured years of economic pain. A recession on the island has lasted more than a decade. Hundreds of thousands of people have left. A debt crisis has bankrupted the government. Congress placed Puerto Rico’s finances under the control of a federal oversight board. Then came the hurricane. Some people were without electricity for almost a year afterward.
When the protests erupted, both in San Juan and in mainland cities that are home to members of the vast Puerto Rican diaspora, the governor resisted relinquishing his position. He said he had acted inappropriately but not unlawfully in the group chat, and vowed to finish his term, which runs through 2020.
But as crowds continued to gather outside his official residence and as the unrest spread to other parts of the island, leaders from San Juan to Washington abandoned Mr. Rosselló. He was left to choose between resigning and facing a lengthy and embarrassing impeachment, orchestrated by his own New Progressive Party to force him out.
Mr. Rosselló tried to buy time by announcing on Sunday that he would not seek re-election, and that he would step down as president of his party. All that did, however, was intensify the resolve of the people on the streets, who insisted that only his resignation would suffice.
Calls for the governor’s resignation came from all corners of the island and from Washington, where Republican and Democratic lawmakers said Mr. Rosselló had lost so much credibility that Congress might be less likely to disburse important federal aid to Puerto Rico.
Mr. Rosselló’s departure appeared to end a political dynasty in Puerto Rico. His father, Pedro J. Rosselló, was governor from 1993 through 2000. Corruption scandals plagued the elder Mr. Rosselló’s administration. The scandals did not force him to resign, but they did appear to keep him from winning a third term. The elder Mr. Rosselló resigned from the New Progressive Party two days before his son resigned his post.