The country hopes to become the fourth to land on the lunar surface with the robotic probe.
This article was originally published on July 14 and has been updated to reflect the rescheduled launch date.
If all goes well in the coming days and weeks, India hopes to become No. 4 with its Chandrayaan-2 mission. The homegrown mission to the moon aims to demonstrate the technological achievements of one of the largest countries on Earth.
The mission launched from India’s east coast at 2:43 p.m. local time on Monday. Approximately 16 minutes after liftoff, Chandrayaan-2 separated from a Geosynchronous Satellite Launch Vehicle — Mark III, India’s most powerful rocket, and headed into Earth orbit.
A video stream provided by the Indian Space Research Organization, India’s equivalent of NASA, showed the mission’s engineers and directors celebrating as they observed a live feed of the deployment of thee spacecraft.
The space agency will attempt to deploy a lander and rover on the lunar surface on Sept. 7.
Chandrayaan-2 will take a slow, fuel-efficient path the moon, similar to the trajectory that the Israeli Beresheet spacecraft followed. Through repeated firings of its thrusters, it will stretch out its elliptical orbit until it is captured by the moon’s gravity. Additional thruster firings will then make the orbit around the moon more circular, a prelude to the landing.
What are the components of the Chandrayaan-2 mission?
and, a six-wheeled rover named Pragyan, which means “wisdom” in Sanskrit.
In September, the lander (which will be carrying the rover) will detach from the orbiter and head to a landing site near the South Pole of the moon.
The rover carries a couple of instruments to measure the composition of moon rocks and soil. The lander carries instruments to measure moonquakes, temperatures a couple of inches into the soil and charged particles from the sun in the extremely tenuous lunar atmosphere.
The lander and rover are expected to operate just a couple of weeks.
The orbiter carries a suite of instruments, including cameras and spectrometers, and is designed to operate at least a year.
Why does India want to put a lander on the moon?
For people in India, the space program is a demonstration of their country’s emerging technological capabilities. The Chandrayaan-2 lander and rover will explore a spot near the lunar South Pole, which is an intriguing region that no one has seen up close yet. Water ice exists deep within eternally shadowed craters near the poles.
Chandrayaan-2 will be heading not into a crater but instead to a high plain between two craters.
What does Chandrayaan mean?
What else has India done in space?
As the 2 in Chandrayaan-2 indicates, India has already sent one spacecraft to the moon. The orbiter Chandrayaan-1, launched in 2008, operated for 10 months and helped confirm the presence of water ice in the lunar craters.
India also launched an orbiter to Mars in 2013 that continues to orbit the red planet, and in 2017, an Indian rocket deployed 104 satellites, a record for a single launch.
India’s space missions have cost a fraction of those from bigger space agencies like NASA and the European Space Agency, but they have also generally carried simpler payloads. That is also true of Chandrayaan-2, which cost less than $150 million.
In March, India also demonstrated a less friendly space capability, an antisatellite test that scattered hundreds of pieces of debris. China, the United States and Russia have developed similar weapons.
What are India’s other planned missions?
ISRO’s plans include additional robotic missions to Venus, Mars, the moon and the sun.
India is also working on flying its astronauts to Earth orbit on Gaganyaan, or “orbital vehicle.” A crewless test is scheduled for December of next year; the first flight with people aboard is scheduled for 2022.
What other visitors has the moon had recently?
China landed Chang’e-4, a robotic lander, on the far side of the moon in January. The unsuccessful landing attempt by Israel’s Beresheet occurred in April.
The Trump administration is aiming for the United States to return astronauts to the moon in 2024, and NASA is also paying private companies to carry scientific payloads to the lunar surface, potentially as soon as next year.