LONDON — Three Iranian boats on Thursday briefly tried to block passage of a British tanker in the Strait of Hormuz, Britain’s Defense Ministry said, in the latest sign that Tehran is seeking any possible pressure point it can exploit in its escalating confrontation with the West.
The tanker, British Heritage, was under escort by a warship, the Montrose, and after a brief standoff but no exchange of fire the three Iranian boats complied with “verbal warnings” to retreat, the ministry said in a statement.
“We are concerned by this action and continue to urge the Iranian authorities to de-escalate the situation in the region,” it said.
The latest showdown came less than a month after the downing of an American surveillance drone by the Iranian military brought the United States to the brink of a retaliatory missile strike, aborted by President Trump only moments before launch.
Against a backdrop of building tension, many analysts and diplomats warn, each small confrontation, like the encounter with the tanker on Thursday, increases the risk of a more violent and deadly conflict.
Iran denied having attempted to stop the tanker, official news agencies reported. But as recently as last Friday, a senior Iranian military officer had warned that its forces might try to seize a ship in retaliation for the British impounding of an Iranian tanker last week off the coast of Gibraltar. The tanker was suspected of violating a European Union embargo of oil sales to Syria.
At the core of the broader confrontation with Iran is the Trump administration’s decision last year to repudiate a 2015 accord Iran reached with the United States and other international powers. The agreement called for Iran to suspend and dismantle most of its nuclear program — which the United States and its allies suspected, despite Iranian denials, might someday produce a nuclear weapon — in exchange for relief from international economic sanctions.
Demanding that Iran submit to far more sweeping restrictions on its nuclear, military and other activities, the Trump administration last year began a new campaign of “maximum pressure.” It culminated in May with the imposition of penalties designed to choke off Iranian oil exports anywhere in the world.
For Iran, the result has been devastating, and its officials have accused Washington of “economic warfare.” Now, the Iranians appear intent on putting their own pressure on the United States and its allies by pushing back on at least two different fronts.
In its most public response, Iran has taken carefully calibrated steps to revive its nuclear program. President Hassan Rouhani has come close to taunting Western officials with threats that Tehran could soon restart precisely the nuclear programs the West had deemed a menace.
And by briefly detaining the British tanker on Thursday, Iran has issued a reminder of its potential to threaten the crucial Persian Gulf oil shipping routes, a main artery of the global economy.
Over the last two months, the United States had already accused Iran of using mines to damage six petroleum tankers in two separate attacks in the waters of the Persian Gulf.
Iran denied responsibility for those attacks. But the resulting sense of insecurity has pushed up oil prices and driven up the costs of insuring oil shipments through the Persian Gulf more than tenfold, according to industry executives.
“Since the attacks in early May, insurance costs have soared and some owners turned wary of sending their carriers to the region,” The Insurance Journal, a trade publication, recently reported.
Mr. Trump, in remarks to journalists on Sunday, warned that Iran had “better be careful” about its revival of the nuclear program.
“It looks like we are going to be in simmering conflict for the near term,” she said.
Britain, like other European powers, has been caught in the middle of the escalating feud. Britain, France, Germany and the European Union all signed the 2015 accord. Breaking with the Trump administration, all continue to support the deal, urging both the United States and Iran to resume compliance with its provisions.
As a group, the European powers have largely placed the blame for the breaching of the agreement primarily on the Trump administration, especially while Iran continued until recently to remain within its commitments under the deal.
But among the European powers, Britain has been the most wary of Iran and dubious about its intentions, diplomats say, making it a pivotal player in the deliberations over the future of the deal. If Britain decided to respond to Tehran’s steps over the limits of the deal by joining the United States in the resumption of sanctions, that could extinguish hopes of reviving the agreement.
If Britain did not release the tanker, Iran would “be duty-bound to take reciprocal action and seize a British oil tanker, Mohsen Rezaei, a senior officer in Iran’s elite Islamic Revolutionary Guards Corps warned last Friday.
“You, Britain, are the initiator of insecurity and you will realize the consequences later,” he warned on Wednesday.
“We are continuing to monitor the situation very, very carefully,” Mr. Hunt told Sky News.
Iran has long maintained that it does not seek a nuclear weapon. But the United States and some of its allies have been skeptical, citing evidence that Tehran was leaving that option open, and had hidden secret nuclear research that could move it closer to building a weapon.
Over the last two weeks, Iran has exceeded the cap on its stockpile of low-enriched uranium and has also begun enriching uranium to slightly higher levels than had been allowed under the deal. Both moves could be easily reversed if Iran decides to return to full compliance with the agreement, but could be small steps toward building a nuclear weapon.
Iran argues that its steps are authorized under the agreement because European governments have failed to deliver the promised sanctions relief. It says it will take additional steps in 60-day intervals unless Western governments provide economic relief.
