WASHINGTON — Iran on Monday violated a key provision of the 2015 international accord to restrict its nuclear program and signaled that it would soon breach another as it seeks more leverage in its escalating confrontation with the United States.
International inspectors confirmed that Iran had exceeded a critical limit on how much nuclear fuel it can possess under the agreement, which President Trump abandoned more than a year ago. By itself, the move does not give Iran enough material to produce a single nuclear weapon, though it inches it in that direction.
Hours later, Iran’s foreign minister said his nation now intended to begin enriching its nuclear fuel to a purer level, a provocative action that, depending on how far Tehran goes with it, could move the country closer to possessing fuel that with further processing could be used in a weapon.
The moves completed a sharp shift in strategy for Iran, which for the past 14 months had continued to respect the terms of the complex deal it struck with the Obama administration, even after Mr. Trump reimposed sanctions in an effort to strangle Iran’s economy by driving its oil revenues to zero. President Hassan Rouhani of Iran signaled the change in approach in May, but Tehran did not actually breach a central element of the agreement until Monday.
But while the moves appear to return Iran to its two-decade pursuit of the technology necessary to develop a nuclear arsenal, the real goal may have been to gain a diplomatic advantage for any future negotiations. Iranian leaders are betting they can force European countries, who were deeply critical of Mr. Trump’s scrapping of the nuclear deal, to deliver on promises to help compensate Tehran for the effects of American sanctions.
The administration has insisted that Iran continue to abide by the 2015 deal’s terms, even though Mr. Trump was the first to repudiate it, imposing escalating sanctions that are spurring high inflation and deep budget cuts in Iran.
But the administration made no overt threats of military action. Iran’s bit-by-bit violations of the accord are all reversible, and it is not clear how much either side wants to further escalate given that tensions have already been running high after the downing of an American surveillance drone by Iran last month nearly resulted in military strikes.
Iran’s moves nonetheless brought expressions of concern from American allies, some of whom fear Washington and Tehran are on a collision course.
Israel’s prime minister, Benjamin Netanyahu, who lobbied Congress hard to defeat the deal four years ago, put the move in far more dire terms.
He urged Europe to impose “snapback” sanctions against Iran, under provisions that were written into the arrangement to deal with violations.
But European officials have long argued that Mr. Trump essentially pushed the Iranians into the violations, and they are likely to be divided on the question of whether to pursue sanctions that would most likely terminate the arrangement entirely. The Iranians argue that they are under no obligations to adhere to the deal’s terms since Mr. Trump abandoned the pact.
“The E.U. remains fully committed to the agreement as long as Iran continues to fully implement its nuclear commitments,” said Maja Kocijancic, a spokeswoman for the European Union, adding that Iran had complied with the deal for 14 months after the United States’ withdrawal. “We urge Iran to reverse this step and to refrain from further measures that undermine the nuclear deal,” she said.
The 2015 agreement with Iran was negotiated by the United States under President Barack Obama along with Britain, France, Germany, Russia and China. The European powers have been trying to keep Iran in the deal even after the withdrawal of the United States, but negotiations on a possible agreement for Europe to help Iran financially by coming up with a workaround to some American sanctions ended inconclusively last week.
The breach of the limit on how much nuclear fuel Iran can possess restricted its stockpile of low-enriched uranium to about 660 pounds. The decision was the strongest warning yet that Iran may be willing to rebuild the far larger stockpile that it agreed to send abroad under the deal.
Shortly after Iranian news agencies and the International Atomic Energy Agency confirmed that Iran had exceeded the stockpile limit, Mohammad Javad Zarif, the country’s foreign minister and the man who negotiated the agreement with the Obama administration, said Iran would now turn to enriching the nuclear fuel.
“Our next step will be enriching uranium beyond the 3.67 percent allowed under the deal,” he said, according to a state-run Iranian broadcaster. He blamed the Europeans, who he said “have failed to fulfill their promises of protecting Iran’s interests” by compensating for billions of dollars in losses to the Iranian economy caused by the American sanctions.
The enrichment level limit in the 2015 deal was set to assure that Iran’s small amount of fuel could be useful only in producing nuclear energy, not a bomb. Higher enrichment levels take Iran closer to making the kind of material needed for a bomb — which requires something closer to 90 percent purity.
Iran has consistently denied that it has any intention of making a nuclear weapon, but a trove of nuclear-related documents, spirited out of a Tehran warehouse by Israeli agents last year, showed extensive work before 2003 to design a nuclear warhead.
Mr. Trump said last month that any effort by Iran to race to build a bomb might prompt him to take military action. But the move signaled by Iran on Monday fell far short of that threshold, and could have been intended to impress on the Europeans the importance of returning to negotiations over giving Tehran some relief from the sanctions.
Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in May that the United States would never allow Iran to get within one year of possessing enough fuel to produce a nuclear weapon.
His special envoy for Iran, Brian H. Hook, has often said that under a new deal, the United States would insist on “zero enrichment for Iran.” Mr. Hook has estimated that the sanctions have cost Iran $50 billion in lost oil sales, far more than the system the Europeans are putting in place would generate.
Iran has so far rejected beginning any negotiation with Washington, saying that the United States must first return to the 2015 agreement and comply with all of its terms.
In fact, there is an argument to be made that Mr. Trump pushed Iran into exceeding the stockpile limit. Among the recently imposed sanctions was one that threatened action against any country that bought low-enriched uranium from Tehran. To comply with the stockpile limits, Iran shipped low-enriched uranium to Russia in return for natural uranium. With that exchange now barred, it was only a matter of time before Iran exceeded the limits.
Even before the announcement, the Pentagon and the United States’ intelligence agencies — led by the C.I.A. and the National Security Agency — were beginning to review what steps to take if the president determined that Iran was getting too close to producing a bomb.
But any operation against Iran’s nuclear infrastructure, with either conventional arms or cyberweapons, would be highly risky. And some administration officials warn that acting now would be premature. Even if Iran possesses 800 or 900 kilograms of uranium, it would be insufficient for a single bomb. That threshold is not likely to be crossed until later this summer.