One police officer from Gretna, La., referred to the congresswoman as a “vile idiot” and suggested she should be shot. Another officer liked the post.
Two police officers in Gretna, La., were fired on Monday, four days after one of them referred to Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez as a “vile idiot” on social media and suggested that she should be shot.
Chief Arthur Lawson of the Gretna Police Department announced the terminations, saying that Charles Rispoli, the officer who wrote the Facebook post, and Angelo Varisco, who liked the post online, had violated the department’s social media policy.
Mr. Rispoli, a 14-year veteran of the Police Department, said in a Facebook post on Thursday that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez “needs a round — and I don’t mean the kind she used to serve,” a reference to her past work as a bartender, according to a screenshot of the comment obtained by The Times-Picayune of New Orleans.
Mr. Varisco joined the department in 2016. In the screenshot, his name can be seen as one of four who reacted to the post, either with a laughing face emoji or a thumbs-up.
Neither Mr. Rispoli nor Mr. Varisco could be reached for comment on Monday evening.
Ms. Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, is a self-described democratic socialist and has been a strong critic of President Trump. She is one of four first-year female Democrats in the House — three of whom were born in the United States — who were told by Mr. Trump to “go back” to their countries in a Twitter post last week.
A representative of Ms. Ocasio-Cortez declined to comment on Monday night.
Chief Lawson said he had trouble understanding Mr. Rispoli’s post, especially since the article he shared — which claimed that Ms. Ocasio-Cortez had said soldiers were paid too much — was satirical.
The action against the officers in Louisiana came at a time of increased scrutiny of police officers’ activity on social media.
Last month, researchers with the Plain View Project released a compilation of troubling posts made by public safety officers. They examined eight police departments across the country and found that — of the Facebook profiles they could verify — about one in five current officers, including many in supervisory roles, and more than two in five former officers used content that was misogynist, racist, Islamophobic or otherwise biased, or that undermined the concept of due process.
The project spawned investigations and repercussions in Philadelphia, Phoenix, St. Louis and elsewhere.
Chief Lawson said that Gretna police officers had been trained and made aware of other episodes across the country in which officials had gotten into trouble for inappropriate social media posts.
