White supremacy has its own peculiar logic, to which the president is peculiarly attuned.
President Trump has done nothing for his white working-class voters. His signature tax cut was a giveaway to powerful business interests and wealthy heirs. His trade wars have forced farmers into dire economic straits. His White House is more interested in cutting food stamps than lifting wages. The economy is growing and unemployment is low, but that has as much to do with the previous administration as it does with anything he’s done.
To obscure his indifference to these voters, Trump has turned up the heat on his racism. Two weekends ago, he attacked four congresswomen of color, telling them to “go back” to the “totally broken and crime infested places from which they came.” And this past weekend, he went after Representative Elijah Cummings of Maryland, an African-American congressman from Baltimore.
But I’m not interested in dwelling on the particulars of the president’s prejudice. What I’m struck by is how Trump is explicitly operating in the old American political tradition of race baiting, which used to go by another name — of denouncing blacks, immigrants and other hated groups to win votes and turn attention from the actual material agendas at work. This type of politics dominated the South from the end of Reconstruction until the civil rights era, electing generations of Southern politicians, including now obscure but once infamous names like Senator James K. Vardaman of Mississippi (in office from 1913 to 1919), Senator Ellison (Cotton Ed) Smith of South Carolina (in office from 1909 to 1944) and Gov. Eugene Talmadge of Georgia (who served 1933 to 1937 and 1941 to 1943). This is not ancient history by any means.
You can find aspects of each man’s career in Trump’s approach to politics — the superficially populist rhetoric of Vardaman, the casual demagoguery of Smith and the corruption of Talmadge — but one figure, for me, stands out in particular: Ben (Pitchfork) Tillman of South Carolina.
Ben Tillman was a son of privilege. His father, a rich planter in the western “upcountry” of South Carolina, owned dozens of slaves and thousands of acres of land. Even after the Civil War and Emancipation destroyed the wealth of the planter class, the Tillman family retained its land and social standing. By the end of the 1870s, the younger Tillman — whose father died before the war and whose mother died roughly 10 years after — was himself part of the state’s landed, agricultural elite.
As part of that elite, Tillman was involved in local Democratic politics, part of a class of men who stood against the state’s Reconstruction government. In 1876, he led a white supremacist vigilante group — called “red-shirts” after their makeshift uniforms — against a garrison of black militiamen in Hamburg, a mostly black town just a few miles from Tillman’s home in Edgefield County. Several black fighters were killed in open conflict, and at least five others were executed as prisoners.
That massacre, the historian Stephen Kantrowitz writes in “Ben Tillman and the Reconstruction of White Supremacy,” was part of a sequence of violent episodes that “created a coercive political climate” in the state. That climate, which intimidated black voters and weakened the South Carolina Republican Party, helped unreconstructed “Redeemer” Democrats win the governor’s mansion that fall. This was concurrent with a national election — the contested presidential race that ultimately placed Rutherford B. Hayes in the White House — that would mark the official end of federal intervention in the South.
But there was division in the anti-Reconstruction coalition. Some members of the planter elite, like newly elected governor, Wade Hampton, saw a place at the table for black South Carolinians, provided they backed the new political order. They came from the state’s “low country” counties around Charleston, where slavery had its deepest roots and where most black South Carolinians still lived and worked. This side of the elite class sought a status quo where they retained power over state politics, bolstered by limited black political participation.
Their counterparts in the upcountry, where slavery was less prevalent, wanted total black disenfranchisement — a completely white electorate would tip the balance of power away from the coast.  The South Carolina chapter of the Greenback-Labor Party, organized in 1879, called for paper “greenback” dollars, equitable taxation, free and fair elections, and an end to racial and partisan discrimination.
In the middle of all of this was Tillman. A white supremacist, he sought race hierarchy and the elevation of patriarchal white manhood. A large landowner, he was skeptical that ordinary white men actually had the full capacity to govern. A man of the upcountry, he wanted to steer power away from the low country planters and toward the farmers of the western regions.
Tillman would capitalize on the tensions and conflicts among white South Carolinians to launch his political career. Nicknamed (Pitchfork) for his threat to stick President Grover Cleveland with a pitchfork over his support for the gold standard, he would earn a reputation for coarse, vulgar and violent rhetoric. He would use the language of populism and agrarian rebellion to build a constituency among white men who felt ignored and disadvantaged, angered, anxious and alienated.
His targets weren’t the planter elite, of which he was a member.  “Negro domination hangs over us,” he warned in 1891, “like the sword of Damocles.” As governor of South Carolina and later, as a United States senator, he made black Americans the targets of his abuse and invective. He denied aid to black laborers that he sought for their white counterparts, saying that they “cannot be treated as we would treat white people.” And he urged his colleagues to repeal the Fifteenth Amendment to the Constitution, which gave African-Americans the right to vote. He took a lead role in rewriting South Carolina’s constitution to disenfranchise black Americans (as well as a good number of poor white men).
In the last decade of his life, Tillman’s anti-black politics became even more extreme. He proposed a “passport” system to control the movement of all black Americans, and backed “white” immigration from northern Europe to end the South’s reliance on black labor. When he died, in 1918, he was in the midst of a fifth campaign for the Senate.
There’s no chance that Donald Trump has heard of Tillman or any of these men. And this isn’t a one-to-one comparison. Where Trump uses violent language, Tillman inflicted actual violence. But look at how Trump speaks and acts, and there’s no question he’s working with the spirit of the Dixie demagogues as he re-enacts and recapitulates the worst of our nation’s history. He’s drawing on their awful contributions to American life, to restore something of the country as it once was.