“The data regarding deaths was particularly informative of our decisions,” said Dr. Jeffrey Shuren, director of the F.D.A.’s Center for Devices and Radiological Health.
The disease is anaplastic large-cell lymphoma, a rare cancer of the immune system. It is not breast cancer, but develops in tissue around the implant. In most cases, removing the implant and the scar tissue around it cures the cancer, but if it is not detected early it can spread and kill the patient. The condition has occurred with implants placed for cosmetic breast enlargement and with those used for reconstruction after mastectomy for breast cancer. The F.D.A. first recognized the link to breast implants in 2011.
The lymphoma is rare, given that millions of women have breast implants. Breast enlargement is the most popular type of plastic surgery in the United States, with more than 300,000 operations performed in 2017, a 3 percent increase over 2016, according to the most recent data from the American Society of Plastic Surgeons. About 100,000 other women received implants in 2017 during reconstructive surgery after mastectomy for breast cancer in the United States.
Despite the low incidence of the lymphoma, the F.D.A. said in a safety communication for patients that “at the present time, we believe all individuals who are considering a breast implant of any type be informed of the risk of developing” the disease.
The Biocell textured implants carry a risk that is about six times that of other textured implants sold in the United States, the agency said. Hundreds of thousands of women in the United States have Biocell implants, Dr. Binita Ashar, director of the F.D.A.’s Office of Surgical and Infection Control Devices, said at a news briefing on Wednesday about the recall.
The main symptoms of the lymphoma are usually swelling and fluid accumulation around the implant. If those symptoms occur, the fluid should be drained and tested for the cancer.
Women who have these implants, but no symptoms, do not need to have them removed, the F.D.A. said. The recall means that doctors and hospitals should not implant any more of the devices and should return any on their shelves to Allergan, a major international manufacturer of breast implants.
Dr. Mark Clemens, a plastic surgeon at the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center in Houston, who has been studying the lymphoma, said he supported the F.D.A.’s decision. “We have tried to give them all the data and the information that they need to make this decision,” he said.
The agency held two days of emotionally charged meetings about breast implants in March, hearing from women who had had lymphoma and others who had developed debilitating symptoms like pain and fatigue after receiving implants, which the F.D.A. had acknowledged might occur. The lymphoma patients called for a ban on textured implants.
But in May, the agency declined to ban the implants, saying that the lymphoma risk was low and that there was not enough data to justify taking the devices off the market. But a significant increase in the number of cases and deaths led the agency to act on Wednesday.
Ms. Hollrah, who testified at the F.D.A. meeting in March, added, “Our work is not done yet.” She said she and other advocates heard from patients every day seeking help with lymphoma, including some who had implants that were not part of the recall. Many of those patients had received incorrect diagnoses or had difficulty getting doctors to take their symptoms seriously.
The recalled devices listed by the F.D.A. are Biocell products including: Natrelle saline-filled breast implants, Natrelle silicone-filled breast implants, Natrelle Inspira silicone-filled breast implants and Natrelle 410 highly cohesive anatomically shaped silicone-filled breast implants. The recall also includes tissue expanders used by patients before breast augmentation or reconstruction, including Natrelle 133 Plus tissue expander and Natrelle 133 tissue expander with suture tabs.
The stock price of Allergan, which makes an array of products like Botox and treatments for dry eyes, dipped slightly on the news. It was down about 0.3 percent midday Wednesday.
