Believers have a spiritual obligation to defend their L.G.B.T.Q. brothers and sisters, even against archbishops.
NASHVILLE — On June 26, 2015, I was standing on the sidewalk in front of the United States Supreme Court building with my husband and two of our sons. We were all waving flags emblazoned with an equal sign, gifts from a stranger waiting for the court to hand down a decision in Obergefell v. Hodges, a case widely expected to decide the future of same-sex marriage in this country.
We’d gotten to the demonstration early, but hundreds of people were there first, and the crowd continued to swell. They were obsessively refreshing SCOTUSblog on their phones, hoping for news, and speculating about what the justices might decide. The best-case scenario seemed to be a ruling that would require all states, even those where same-sex marriage was illegal, to recognize marriages performed in other states.
All around us people erupted in joy, chanting, “Love has won! Love has won!” We live in Tennessee, one of the states that had outlawed same-sex marriage, and I could hardly believe it. Love had actually won.
By “ministerial witnesses,” he means teachers. In Catholic schools, teachers are expected to serve as living examples of Catholic teaching, which emphasizes the need to treat others with compassion, to alleviate the suffering of the oppressed, and to organize community life around the institution of marriage, among other central tenets of the faith.
In this context, the hypocrisy of the archbishop’s position is breathtaking. This teacher had entered into a legal marriage protected by the Constitution. The teacher’s work was so exemplary that Cathedral High School officials spent 22 months trying to persuade the archbishop to reconsider his directive. The archbishop responded by threatening to strip the school of its identity as a Catholic institution if the teacher remained on staff. Last week officials made the “agonizing” decision to let the teacher go.
Despite the archbishop’s words, his behavior does look very much like a witch hunt. He has apparently not directed Catholic school officials to fire teachers who practice birth control or divorced teachers who remarry without benefit of a church annulment. In calling for the dismissal of all teachers who fail to exemplify every teaching of the Catholic church, the “categories of people you would need to fire” would amount to “a huge list,” the Rev. James Martin, a Jesuit priest and editor at America Magazine, told The Times. Persecuting teachers in same-sex marriages is Archbishop Thompson’s specific focus.
That reference to an “informed conscience” brought to mind my own experience at Catholic school. I was in sixth grade when the parish priest visited our religion class to take questions. That kind of classroom visit was a post-Vatican II bonding exercise, I suspect. Kumbaya Catholicism, circa 1973.
But the priest was taking questions, and I had a question. If God is all-merciful, how can there possibly be a hell? I could not imagine a sin so egregious that it was beyond the reach of my own capacity for mercy, and I was only a human being. I was certainly not God.
The priest did not point out that I was a little girl, intellectually ill equipped to question theology. He explained that God had given me a conscience and a good mind. In spiritual matters I must study church teachings and listen to the explanations of my elders and pray for discernment — and if I did all those things and nevertheless came to a conclusion at odds with my church’s position, I was not obliged to follow church teaching. In fact, I was obliged to do the opposite: to honor the moral wisdom of my own conscience over the teaching of my church.
I don’t recall whether this priest referred explicitly to the primacy of an informed conscience, but I have never forgotten his message, a principle of faith that goes back to St. Thomas Aquinas and was recently reaffirmed by Pope Francis. It’s why officials at Brebeuf Jesuit defied the archbishop of Indianapolis. It’s why my husband and I took our children to the Supreme Court steps the morning the Obergefell decision was announced. Love will never truly win until everyone stands up for it.
Catholics today don’t hear much about the primacy of an informed conscience because many priests take the position that a conscience at odds with the church is by definition insufficiently informed. But the primacy of an informed conscience belongs as deeply to church tradition as the current brand of pastoral authoritarianism does. It is time for Catholics to remember it again and stand up for their brothers and sisters in same-sex marriages, as Brebeuf Jesuit has done, even if it means defying the teaching of their own imperfect church.
“No union is more profound than marriage, for it embodies the highest ideals of love, fidelity, devotion, sacrifice and family,” wrote Justice Kennedy in the Obergefell decision. “In forming a marital union, two people become something greater than once they were.” In defending the moral and spiritual equality of those in same-sex marriages, Christian believers too have the opportunity to become something greater than once they were.