Yahya Jammeh, the president who led a brutal regime in Gambia for 22 years, was accused by Fatou Jallow, whom he crowned as beauty queen, of raping her five years ago after she turned down his marriage proposal. She was 18 at the time.
The statement from the president’s party, by the deputy party leader, Ousman Rambo Jatta, came in response to an article in The New York Times last week in which Ms. Jallow came forward publicly for the first time to accuse the president of rape. The statement said that Ms. Jallow’s account contained “no iota of truth,” and claimed that the accusations were orchestrated by Western corporations. It noted that Mr. Jammeh is still the party’s leader.
Ms. Jallow, who received asylum in Canada soon after the alleged incident, has triggered a #MeToo moment in Gambia, a nation of two million, with widespread responses on social media in the country and beyond as women began airing their own experiences of sexual assault.
It is a significant development in Gambia, where rape carries a heavy stigma for victims and such accusations are rarely discussed, even among family members. Ms. Jallow is widely known in Gambia as Toufah; the hashtag #IamToufah was circulating along with some women’s claims.
The nation’s attorney general said on Monday that he was investigating numerous sexual assault claims against Melville Robertson Roberts, a deputy secretary at the foreign ministry and a prominent lawyer. Mr. Roberts has denied the claims and said they were made by women he had rejected or who wanted to extort him for money. Efforts to reach him on Monday were unsuccessful.
Abubacarr M. Tambadou, Gambia’s attorney general, has also called on women with accusations against Mr. Jammeh to come forward, and said he was investigating Ms. Jallow’s claims.
Ms. Jallow, now 23, said that after she turned down the president’s marriage proposal, she was summoned to the statehouse for what she was told was a Ramadan event with all the beauty pageant participants. When she arrived, she said, she was directed to a room where the president entered in his undergarments, pushed her on a bed and raped her.
“Toufah hit Gambia like a tsunami smashing a huge taboo,” said Reed Brody, a lawyer for Human Rights Watch who is representing Ms. Jallow.
Ms. Jallow said that a driver working for the president drove her to and from the statehouse. The party statement said that the driver denied her claims.
The statement also asserted that The Times had not sought “clarifications” from Mr. Jammeh’s family or the party. However, The Times made repeated requests for a response in the week before the article was published to the party’s spokesman, to other officials close to Mr. Jammeh, as well as a relative and government officials in Equatorial Guinea, where Mr. Jammeh fled after losing an election in 2017. None responded.
Mr. Jammeh, who came to power in a coup that he led in 1994, was accused of running a brutal regime in which citizens were tortured, jailed, raped and disappeared. He threatened to behead gay people, ordered government agents to hunt down people he said were witches and demanded that AIDS patients be taken off their medications and treated with an herbal mixture.
He lost an election in December 2016, but refused to step down for more than a month. Regional leaders intervened, and he was allowed to flee to Equatorial Guinea. He has never faced charges for any accusations against him.
“He was accused of far graver crimes than rape and most of the accusations have now been proven to be false,” read the statement from Mr. Jammeh’s party.
The statement called him “a pious leader, who has nothing but respect for Gambian women and women around the world,” and noted that he had enacted laws to abolish the practice of female genital mutilation.
A Truth and Reconciliation and Reparations Commission is hearing testimony from victims of alleged crimes during Mr. Jammeh’s regime. Ms. Jallow is scheduled to testify later this year.