It’s Monday. Let’s power through this week, together.
Weather: Not bad for a Monday: Sunny skies and a high in the mid-80s.
Forty-two years to the day after New York lost power for 25 hours in 1977, the city was again cast into darkness after a Con Edison malfunction created a blackout across a swath of the Upper West Side and Midtown Manhattan for several hours on Saturday night.
It couldn’t have been more perfect for one couple who were getting married just as the lights went out at the Plaza Hotel on Fifth Avenue.
Amy Rosenthal, the bride, had just walked down the aisle. Then, almost as soon as she clasped hands with her soon-to-be husband, Craig Silverstein, darkness struck.
And so, guided by the light of smartphones and a wedding photographer’s light stand, the ceremony continued.
Afterward at the reception, the 12-piece band improvised, too. Using instruments that didn’t require power (saxophone, trumpet, violin), the band played on. Realizing it couldn’t use a microphone, it stuck to easy-to-sing classics.
The Con Edison malfunction affected six power sectors, cutting electricity from 72nd Street to the West 40s, and from Fifth Avenue to the Hudson River. The failure shut down 26 Broadway shows near an eerily dim Times Square, caused traffic lights to stop working and stranded at least 2,875 subway passengers, who were escorted to safety off three D trains and two A trains.
Top Con Edison officials apologized on Sunday and said it was too soon to know exactly what caused the failure to cascade from neighborhood to neighborhood.
Never change, New York.
The power went out. Where was de Blasio? He was in rural Iowa, illustrating the perils mayors face when they run for president.
ICE raids begin. The crackdowns, aimed at undocumented migrants, took place across the country, including unsuccessful attempts in East Harlem and Sunset Park.
It should take me 14 minutes to get to work on a good day. We calculated how long it should take you to get to any destination on a perfect M.T.A. day, on a bad day and on a typical day.
When Big Tobacco invoked Eric Garner to fight a menthol cigarette ban: Corporate lobbyists are highlighting the concerns of black New Yorkers to support their clients’ causes.
New York was supposedly getting better for cyclists. What happened?
And finally: Who mows the lawn at Storm King?
It takes four hours to clean the 300-plus slats in Alyson Shotz’s “Mirror Fence.” It can take the whole day to trim the 240,000 square feet of Maya Lin’s “Storm King Wavefield.” Storm King Art Center, a sculpture park in Cornwall, N.Y., is not your typical museum, and the eight members of its facilities crew are not your typical maintenance workers.
They do more than just mow the lawn and trim the trees at Storm King.
The team’s leader, Mike Seaman, describes himself as an intermediary between artists and nature, ensuring that the artwork and the environment interact harmoniously.
The artworks at Storm King, New York’s largest sculpture park, live among the rabbits, red-winged blackbirds and wild turkeys that call Cornwall home.
Spread across 500 acres in the Hudson Valley, the works are out in the open — susceptible to the merciless weather.
Mr. Seaman and his crew are well-versed on the weather and topography of Storm King, sometimes telling artists that their ideas aren’t feasible because of the impact on the environment. For example, some concepts could result in flooding.
His job, he said, is to “help actualize” the works within the landscape in the “least invasive” way possible.
I made my first trip to Manhattan in June 1964, driving from Buffalo in my 1958 Chevrolet Bel Air. I was 25.
My boss had sent me to the city to try to sell cigarette lighters to Macy’s and Gimbels. Our company, Flame Crest, imported lighters, cigarette cases and other items from Japan. At the time, Ronson and Colibri were the best-known brands, and we were unknown newcomers.
It took me about eight hours to make the trip via the New York State Thruway. I got off the highway at 178th Street.
Driving down Amsterdam Avenue, I got a flat in my right rear tire at around 170th Street. It was getting dark, and there wasn’t a soul around. Huge apartment buildings towered over the avenue on both sides.
I got out of the car, opened the trunk and got the jack. I had never changed a tire before. I placed the jack under the car — was that the right place for it? — and cranked the car up. I tried to unscrew the lug nuts, but the wheel kept spinning and the nuts wouldn’t move.
I was about to give up and walk. I thought maybe there was a service station somewhere nearby. But I would have had to leave my sample case and all my lighters in the car. I didn’t want to do that.
It dawned on me that if I lowered the car back down, the street would provide that friction.
I lowered the car to the street, and was indeed able to unscrew the nuts. I cranked the car back up again, removed the flat tire, got the spare in place, screwed the nuts back on, lowered the car, threw the flat and all the equipment in the trunk and drove off.
The next day, I went to Macy’s. They didn’t want my lighters. Gimbels took a few on consignment.
