
I might have completely written off “Ma,” the ambitious, but not fully realized psychological thriller as a “Get Out” copycat had I not read an interview in which Octavia Spencer said that playing an increasingly unhinged woman, in the starring role, represented a new era in her career. She would no longer play caretakers, nursemaids, stewards of other people’s emotional journeys. “At this point in my life, I will be heard,” she said.
The director Tate Taylor narrates a sequence from his film starring Octavia Spencer.
There is a long history in popular culture of characters unraveling with gusto: Sissy Spacek in “Carrie”; John Wick, to some degree; Daenerys’s razing the entirety of Kings Landing, just because she could. The inner monologue of Nora, the narrator of Claire Messud’s novel “The Woman Upstairs,” fumes with anger at her own unrealized dreams, giving herself permission to lash out in unforgivable ways.
Have we ever seen a black protagonist snap as hard as Ma? Each of the characters described above are white. We’ve certainly seen Elektra Abundance, Cookie Lyon and Olivia Pope char their enemies with a single glance, but murder? Black women onscreen are rarely anything but the impeccably dressed and infallible “superheroes” that the noted black feminist writer Michelle Wallace presciently understood, even back in the 1970s. They are resilient; they rely on humor and “sass” to endure life’s hardships. Anger may be present, but we rarely see it depicted as more than cutting remarks, or a tired bitterness. I kept waiting for Red, the tethered doppelgänger played by Lupita Nyong’o in Jordan’s Peele’s “Us” to have a justifiably explosive meltdown from decades of deceit and pent-up repression, but she never did. Her exterior remained calm, calculating, collected.
“Ma” was originally written for a white character who has a mental break. Tate Taylor, Spencer’s longtime friend and collaborator (they also worked together on “The Help”) wanted to adapt it for her. When he told her that “you actually do all the killing,” she said she replied, “O.K., I’m interested.” What if the witch from Hansel and Gretel had been black? Freddy Krueger? Hannibal Lecter? In “Ma,” we get a Katamari-blend of all three, skewered through the lens of a woman who is sick and tired of people assuming she’s, well, the help.
