When police officers heard gunfire at the Gilroy Garlic Festival Sunday night, they rushed toward the shooting and drew their handguns.
The man they confronted was a teenager armed with what officials later described as an AK-style semiautomatic assault rifle. Officers managed to take down the gunman quickly, averting far worse bloodshed.
But officials later said the teenager should never have had the weapon in the first place.
In Nevada, the purchase by the 19-year-old was legal. But just across the line in California, where the minimum age for purchasing a rifle is now 21, the weapon is banned and should never have been brought into the state, according to the state’s attorney general, Xavier Becerra.
California has some of the toughest gun laws in the country. But the tragedy that played out on Sunday, in which three people were killed and 12 wounded, illustrated a familiar problem for states that have ratcheted up their own gun laws in recent years, only to see them neutralized by neighboring states with more lax rules.
And in Chicago, where city officials perpetually struggle to rein in gun violence, one analysis showed that 60 percent of guns recovered after crimes came from other states that generally have weaker gun laws than Illinois.
Today’s most popular rifles can be modified in ways that keep the weapons legal but nearly indistinguishable from illegal assault weapons.
That includes Indiana — where one in five Chicago crime guns originated — and states like Mississippi, Wisconsin and Ohio.
The flow of guns from Nevada, Arizona and other places has long been a problem for California, too.
Gavin Newsom, governor of California, did not hide his fury at how easy it had been for the gunman to buy his weapon in Fallon, Nev., a six-hour drive from Gilroy.
“You can’t put borders up, speaking of borders, to a neighboring state where you can buy this damn stuff legally,” Mr. Newsom told reporters on Monday.
Even though state officials say the issue in California is significant, it may be more pronounced along the East Coast.
Most guns traced from California crime scenes were bought in the state, according to recent data from the federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives: Only a little more than a third of the guns came from other states.
That proportion is reversed in New York and New Jersey, however.
Between 2010 and 2015, three of every four guns recovered by the authorities in New York state whose state of origination could be determined came from outside New York.
Almost half of them came from six states with comparably weak gun laws, according to data from the New York Attorney General.
The effect of state gun control laws is diluted by a thriving underground market for firearms brought from states with few restrictions.
These states — Pennsylvania, Virginia, North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia and Florida — are part of the so-called “Iron Pipeline” that keeps much of the northeast supplied with black-market weapons ferried by traffickers.
“Our analysis of the data shows these states deserve their anecdotal nickname,” the attorney general concluded in 2016, noting that these states, with only a few exceptions, allow sales between private parties at gun shows without background checks, as well as handgun purchases without first obtaining a permit.
Compare that to New Jersey, which shares a border with New York: It contributed less that one percent of New York’s trafficked guns.
Indeed, New Jersey has found itself in the same predicament as its neighbor. For the first quarter of 2019, more than four of every five identified crime guns in New Jersey came from out of state, largely from the same pipeline that feeds New York.
To advocates of stricter gun laws, the messy patchwork of state laws that contributed to the tragedy in Gilroy is one more reason that federal gun-law changes are needed.
“With Congress mired in stalemate and unable to do anything on the issue, the leadership to address this epidemic has fallen to states,” said Adam Skaggs, chief counsel of the Giffords Law Center to Prevent Gun Violence.
And some states, spurred by youth activism following the massacre last year at a high school in Parkland, Fla., have gained ground. But as long as states maintain different approaches, states that want to toughen their gun laws are fighting an uphill battle, he said.
Mr. Becerra, the attorney general of California, was certainly reminded of that lesson this week.
