Scientists Are Giving Dead Brains New Life. What Could Go Wrong?
In experiments on pig organs, scientists at Yale made a discovery that could someday challenge our understanding of what it means to die.
A few years ago, a scientist named Nenad Sestan began throwing around an idea for an experiment so obviously insane, so “wild” and “totally out there,” as he put it to me recently, that at first he told almost no one about it: not his wife or kids, not his bosses in Yale’s neuroscience department, not the dean of the university’s medical school.
Like everything Sestan studies, the idea centered on the mammalian brain. More specific, it centered on the tree-shaped neurons that govern speech, motor function and thought — the cells, in short, that make us who we are. In the course of his research, Sestan, an expert in developmental neurobiology, regularly ordered slices of animal and human brain tissue from various brain banks, which shipped the specimens to Yale in coolers full of ice. Sometimes the tissue arrived within three or four hours of the donor’s death. Sometimes it took more than a day. Still, Sestan and his team were able to culture, or grow, active cells from that tissue — tissue that was, for all practical purposes, entirely dead. In the right circumstances, they could actually keep the cells alive for several weeks at a stretch.
When I met with Sestan this spring, at his lab in New Haven, he took great care to stress that he was far from the only scientist to have noticed the phenomenon. “Lots of people knew this,” he said. “Lots and lots.” And yet he seems to have been one of the few to take these findings and push them forward: If you could restore activity to individual post-mortem brain cells, he reasoned to himself, what was to stop you from restoring activity to entire slices of post-mortem brain?
To do so would be to create an entirely novel medium for understanding brain function. “One of the things we studied in our lab was the connectome — a kind of wiring map of the brain,” Sestan told me. Research on the connectome, which comprises the brain’s 90 billion neurons and hundreds of trillions of synapses, is widely viewed among neuroscientists as integral to understanding — and potentially treating — a range of disorders, from autism to schizophrenia. And yet there are few reliable ways of tracing all those connections in the brains of large mammals. “I thought, O.K., let’s see if this” — slices of cellularly revived brain tissue — “is the way to go,” Sestan said.
In 2012, Sestan approached two members of his lab, Mihovil Pletikos and Daniel Franjic, and asked them to assist him on the project. Through the spring of 2014, the scientists, often laboring in time they stole from other projects, managed to develop a customized fluid that could preserve centimeter-thick chunks of mouse, pig and human brain for long periods. “Six days was our record,” Sestan recalled. “Six days, and the cells were still culturable.” But there was a hitch: The tissue stayed intact only when the samples were stored in a fridge. Once they were removed and brought to room temperature (any accurate modeling of neuronal function would have to occur at 98.6 degrees Fahrenheit), decomposition rapidly set in.
What Aldini failed to grasp, of course, is that life is not powered by electricity alone. It is powered by blood and oxygen, by gases and acids, by an impossibly intricate symphony of cells that die and regenerate and evolve and grow as we do. And it would be more than 150 years before technology had advanced to the point at which it was possible to observe, let alone duplicate, the most basic of those functions.
In the latter half of the 20th century, a new era of brain research was made possible by inventions like microelectrodes that allowed scientists to listen to neurons communicating and cutting-edge devices like functional magnetic resonance imaging scanners, which allow researchers to track blood flow and neuronal activity in the brain, and to learn how the brain responds to injury. Scientists eventually made great strides on the cellular level: In 1982, Takaaki Kirino, a Japanese researcher, published a groundbreaking paper documenting “delayed neuronal death” in Mongolian gerbils. As Kirino noted, many of the animals’ brain cells apparently remained intact long after blood flow had been cut off to the brain. Later, the same phenomenon was observed in post-mortem human cerebral tissue. And in 1991, scientists discovered that the neurons in the brains of lab rats euthanized up to three hours earlier still retained significant electrical activity. Collectively, the research proved that brain death wasn’t a single event. It happened in gradual steps. And precisely because it was gradual, scientists found that they could delay it or reverse parts of the process altogether — perhaps not as drastically as Giovanni Aldini envisioned, but no less emphatically.
In recent years, some scientists have moved from the study of the organic tissue to the wholesale creation of artificial brain matter. Grown from human stem cells reprogrammed to act like neurons, brain organoids, or “mini brains,” can mimic some of the functions of their biological counterparts — last year, for example, the biologist Alysson Muotri announced that his lab at the University of California had grown brain organoids with neurons that fired at a level consistent with that of a preterm infant. Muotri has said he hopes to use the creations to research brain function and formulate disease models without buying lab animals or expensive specimens from brain banks. “The potential uses are vast,” he has said.
It took him a while to get there. By his own admission, he partied maybe more than he should have; he discovered Iron Maiden, grew his hair long and founded his own band, called Twilight Zone. Before his senior year of high school, as he was planning to eventually leave for college in Zagreb, he learned that his girlfriend, soon to be a sophomore, was pregnant. “I wanted to marry her, but her father goes: ‘She’s too young. Let’s wait,’ ” Sestan said. They dated long-distance for two years; when she graduated, she and their son briefly joined Sestan in the capital, where Sestan set about establishing himself as a neuroscientist. He was a co-author of two papers that were among the first to locate, in the developing human brain, the enzyme that makes nitric oxide, which functions as a transmitter between neurons.
At Yale, Sestan joined a lab run by the renowned neuroscientist Pasko Rakic, then the head of the university’s neuroscience program. “I’m in my 80s now, and I’ve worked with a lot of students,” Rakic told me. “Some of those students, they’re content to sit in place, to do the same thing as everyone else. Nenad was not like that. He always wanted the new thing. The next thing.” Rakic is famous in scientific circles for his research on the cerebral cortex, the center of information processing in the brain. Under his tutelage, Sestan published widely on gene expression and cell development in the cerebral cortex, attracting the notice of the department’s hiring committee. “I think people saw what I saw: how much Nenad was capable of,” Rakic told me. By the summer of 2002, Sestan had been made an assistant professor and given a lab of his own in Sterling Hall, along with a half dozen researchers and postgraduates. He was 32.
As modern medical technologies go, perfusion is a relatively old one: The first perfusion pump, invented in the 1930s by the Nobel Prize-winning scientist and Nazi sympathizer Alexis Carrel and his close friend, the aviator Charles Lindbergh, was used to maintain blood circulation in cat thyroids during a series of transplant operations. Successive generations of engineers have refined and automated Carrel and Lindbergh’s “artificial heart” — if you’ve had open-heart surgery in the past quarter century, your doctors probably had a perfusion system on hand to keep the blood flowing through your brain.
This type of perfusion, performed on a living organ still housed in the host body, is known as “in vivo.” With current technology, it is relatively easy to achieve. “Ex vivo” perfusion, however, is considered by scientists to be far more challenging, while significant attempts to restore metabolic function through a post-mortem ex vivo perfusion of a whole brain are so rare as to be essentially unheard-of. (The most famous attempt was made by the Soviet scientist Sergei Brukhonenko, who used a circulation machine to “revive” a decapitated dog, as documented in the 1940 film “Experiments in the Revival of Organisms,” though many suspect that the footage was doctored.) “You say to a scientist that you want to do this, they’ll think you developed psychosis,” Sestan told me.
Still, as Sestan acknowledged to me, the project was an outlier for him. He felt compelled to put certain safeguards in place: He added “blockers” to the perfusate, to prevent the rise of electrical activity should the experiment succeed in restoring the neurons to do anything resembling consciousness; later, for the same reason, he began keeping a syringe full of a powerful anesthetic in his lab.
The technical hurdles were immense: To perfuse a post-mortem brain, you would have to somehow run fluid through a maze of tiny capillaries that start to clot minutes after death. Everything, from the composition of the blood substitute to the speed of the fluid flow, would have to be calibrated perfectly. In 2015, Sestan struck up an email correspondence with John L. Robertson, a veterinarian and research professor in the department of biomedical engineering at Virginia Tech. For years, Robertson had been collaborating with a North Carolina company, BioMedInnovations, or BMI, on a system known as a CaVESWave — a perfusion machine capable of keeping kidneys, hearts and livers alive outside the body for long stretches. Eventually, Robertson and BMI hoped, the machine would replace cold storage as a way to preserve organs designated for transplants.
For now, one of the few available machines — the third generation of the CaVESWave system — was in Robertson’s lab in Blacksburg, Va.; a majority of the test subjects were pig organs obtained from a nearby slaughterhouse. Sestan was intrigued, and when he traveled to the Washington area that February to present a paper on his gene-expression research, he arranged a side trip to Blacksburg to meet with Robertson in person. “I couldn’t get there fast enough,” Sestan told me. On Interstate 81, near Roanoke, he was pulled over by a state trooper. “I said: ‘I’ll be honest with you, sir.  They scare me. It’s my paranoia.’ ” The trooper thanked him for his honesty and wrote him a ticket anyway.
All three scientists were adamant that they had never once considered carrying out any tests on human specimens. The regulatory bar was too high, and as Sestan put it to me, when it comes to human tissue, post-mortem or not, “there has to be extreme justification, from an ethical standpoint. Which is exactly how it should be.” To a slightly lesser degree, the same is true of other large mammals. But dead animals are a different matter. And BMI had its relationship with the slaughterhouse near Virginia Tech. 
Every morning for several weeks, the scientists woke up around 4:30 to be at the slaughterhouse as the first pigs were led to the killing floor. While they waited, the animals were stunned, killed, eviscerated and stripped of usable meat; later, Daniele and Vrselja would run carrying a bloody pig head in a bag to the manager’s office, where they would use a pump to empty the excess blood from it. Finally, placing the skull on ice, they would drive it back with them to the lab in Blacksburg.
Sestan and his team would end up modifying nearly every aspect of BMI’s machine. Still, both the original and the current iteration, which Yale is seeking a patent for using the name BrainEx, work in fundamentally the same way. First, the brain is mostly freed from the skull; all the dangling arteries, save the carotids, are cauterized or sutured. Next, the organ is flushed of residual blood. At the same time, an amount of perfusate equivalent to a bottle of wine is brought to body temperature in the machine’s reservoir and oxygenated — as with real blood, oxygenation turns the perfusate a darker, scarlet red.
Once the fluid — the present form of which includes antibiotics and nine different types of cytoprotective agents — is ready, the brain is lowered into a plastic case the scientists have nicknamed “the football” and connected via the carotids. A small thermal unit (a miniature air-conditioner and heater) sits under the football, controlling the temperature of the organ; the pressure and speed of the perfusate, meanwhile, are governed by a type of pump. With a dull whir, the fluid begins to circulate across the arteries, capillaries and veins of the brain in a loop, exiting on each circuit through a dialysis unit that “cleans” any waste products and through a filter that removes any naturally occurring bubbles.
Perhaps the most innovative modification involved fluid mechanics, one of Vrselja’s specialties in graduate school. As the British mathematician John Womersley managed to quantify more than half a century ago, blood does not circulate through our arteries at a uniform rhythm — it circulates in pulses, in concert with the shudder of our hearts. To account for that dynamic, the BMI unit had shipped with an automated “pulse generator,” a device that replicates the heartbeat’s pulsatility in the organs.
But the pulse generator’s settings proved unsuitable for brains, which have a different flow pattern than the rest of the body. Before Sestan’s team adjusted the settings, the fluid might not completely permeate the vasculature of the organ, leaving parts of the brain essentially untreated. In such tissue, Daniele told me, “you’d end up with this sludgy, white yogurt-ish substance. It was a mess.” Conversely, if the pressure was too high, “the brain could just physically not stand it.” The organ fell apart.
As the weeks went on, Vrselja and Daniele discovered something encouraging: The interior brain tissue had a moist gray hue, as a living organ would — a sign that some cellular function had been restored. But to know for sure, they would have to perform the requisite lab work.
Over the course of that spring, they fixed brains from separate specimen sets and delivered them to Sestan. “It was the most astonishing thing, ” Sestan recalls. Active brain cells can have a variety of shapes, depending on the type and function. But dead or dying or inactive brain cells tend to look alike, as if a bomb has been set off somewhere in the nucleus and the entire structure has imploded from within. In the face of almost everything that was known about the brain — in the face of centuries of scientific research — the cells from the experimental group were metabolically active. Sestan, hunched over the microscope, could hardly believe what he was seeing. “Oh, my God,” he remembers whispering to himself.
Soon, the scientists had ratcheted up the length of the perfusions, from one hour to two or three, and Sestan found himself staring down a fresh and unusual dilemma. In and of itself, he knew, cellular function is not indicative of life, just as Giovanni Aldini’s galvanic experimentation did not amount to the resurrection of an animal’s mind. And yet by all accounts, the longer Vrselja and Daniele perfused the pig brains, and the better they got at the process, the more brain cells were restored.
And yet as low as the score was, it wasn’t zero. “I just thought, Yeah, O.K., forget it,” Sestan recalled. “I’m not taking any chances. I said: ‘Unplug the machine. Stop the experiment until we can figure out what’s happening.’ ” That same day, he wrote two emails. The first was to a contact at the National Institutes of Health. The second was to Stephen Latham, the director of the Yale Interdisciplinary Center for Bioethics.
Legally, Latham knew, Sestan and his team weren’t in jeopardy. “The way our existing laws on animal research work — and I’ll stipulate that these are laws that many animal ethics people take issue with — you can kill an animal,” Latham told me.  Sestan hadn’t killed any animals; he had merely recycled flesh that would have otherwise been disposed of. “Nenad wasn’t even at the boundary of what isn’t permissible,” Latham said.
And yet in another way, Sestan had long since passed any known boundaries. Cellularly revived dead tissue is “an in-between category,” said Nita Farahany, a law scholar and ethicist at Duke University. “It’s a total gray zone.” There were no rules in place to follow, and no rules to break.
A few days later, Alkawadri completed a round of tests on a perfused porcine brain. He saw no “spontaneous global activity” present in the organ or communication between the various parts of the brain; the BIS reading of 10, Alkawadri theorized, was a result of electrical interference produced by the machine.
By early 2017, Daniele and Vrselja were again expanding the length of the perfusions, past three hours and then to four. But the brains in the control group couldn’t survive cellularly past 240 minutes, at which point decomposition set in, making comparison to the experimental group impossible beyond that.
That summer, after a source told me about the Duke meeting, I reached out to Sestan. In a phone call, he called the experiment “the most important thing I’ve ever done, and the most important thing I will ever do,” and mentioned he was preparing to submit a paper to Nature. Once it had been accepted, he went on, he would get back in touch with me; until then, he wasn’t able to comment on the record.
Within hours, the news had been picked up by media outlets around the world.  The conspiracy theorist Alex Jones brought up the experiment on his radio show.
This spring, I flew to New Haven to tour Sestan’s lab. In a show of ceremony, he saved a viewing of the BrainEx for last. “You,” he said proudly, throwing open the door to a converted supply closet, “are the first member of the public to see it.” Roughly eight feet wide and mounted on the shelves of a long metal hospital-style cart, the BrainEx was less a single machine than a bristling collection of individual machines, each connected to the next, in a simulacrum of the human body. Here, the pulse generator — the equivalent of a heart. Here, the filters — mechanized kidneys. There, the device that, like lungs, helped oxygenate the perfusate. “We’ll do our dance,” Daniele said, and he commenced a dry run — sans brain — of the process, miming each step.
“Don’t forget the Kanye,” Daniele joked.
“Our soundtrack,” Vrselja said with a grin.
