U.S.|Anchorage Had Never Reached 90 Degrees. That Changed This Week.
Anchorage Had Never Reached 90 Degrees. That Changed This Week.
Updated July 5, 2019: Anchorage’s official weather station recorded a temperature of 90 degrees on Thursday afternoon, shattering the previous record high of 85 degrees.
Anchorage has now had 34 days in a row of above-average temperatures — “an exceptional run,” said Brian Brettschneider, a climatologist at the International Arctic Research Center. In Kotzebue, on the shores of northwestern Alaska, that above-average trend has extended for 105 days.
Alaska is experiencing many of the effects of a heating planet, as the nation’s fastest-warming state, according to the Fourth National Climate Assessment. The state’s temperatures are rising at twice the global average rate, with spring temperatures averaging about two to five degrees warmer than those of half a century ago.
One of the more dramatic changes in the state is the retreat of ice on the Bering and Chukchi Seas, which this year disappeared weeks earlier than normal in some areas. Ice reflects sunlight more than open water, which can absorb it and contribute to warmer air temperature above the surface. Surface temperatures on the seas are about four degrees above normal, while some areas are departing the norm by 10 degrees.
“For sea surface temperatures, that’s just astronomical,” said Rick Thoman, a climate specialist at the Alaska Center for Climate Assessment and Policy.
Mr. Thoman worries about the impact on communities that depend on hunting and fishing for survival, sometimes with the aid of ice. “Our communities are resilient, but things are happening so fast,” he said.
Wildfires this year have not been abnormally extreme, but they have consumed about 650,000 acres, which would match a typical full year. Last weekend, the National Weather Service issued its first Dense Smoke Advisory for the Anchorage area, with officials warning of both health and visibility problems caused by the plumes from the Swan Lake Fire that has spent a month charring the Kenai Peninsula south of the city.
Along with the fireworks cancellation in Anchorage, the Alaska State Fire Marshal has banned the sale and use of fireworks in much of the state. Still, with the heat rising and conditions dry, officials were also expecting fresh wildfires that could ignite by other methods.
“We could be up and running with fires here in the next couple days,” said Beth Ipsen, a spokeswoman with the Bureau of Land Management.