HONG KONG — When hundreds of thousands of people in Hong Kong peacefully took to the streets last month, they had a few specific demands, including the withdrawal of an unpopular bill and an investigation into police abuse. In recent days, they added another call: the right to direct elections.
This latest demand brought into focus the issue that has been quietly seething at the heart of the protests: Hong Kong’s increasingly fraught relationship with mainland China and the authoritarian ruling Communist Party.
That longstanding anxiety flared last week when a small group of demonstrators stormed the city’s legislature, blacked out the name for mainland China from Hong Kong’s official emblem and spray-painted slogans calling for universal suffrage.
It was a dramatic rebuke of a political system that protesters say created a ruling class that has become more beholden to Beijing than to Hong Kong since the former British colony’s return to Chinese rule 22 years ago. The protesters’ forceful charging of the legislature brought this anger so jarringly to the fore that even a few members of the pro-establishment camp have urged the government in recent days to revisit steps toward political reforms.
The city’s embattled leader, Carrie Lam, asserted on Tuesday that the bill that would have allowed extraditions to mainland China was “dead” and would not be revived. But she also acknowledged that the protests were driven by broader problems dating to a failed 2014 pro-democracy movement that sought genuine, freer elections.
On Sunday, when tens of thousands of protesters once again urged the government to fully withdraw the bill, they also called for the legislature to be dismissed and for free elections.
“Mainland China worries us the most,” said Patrick Luk, 37, an administrative staffer at a community college who joined the protest with his wife and 5-year-old son. That is why, he said, universal suffrage is his most important priority.
The protests were piling pressure on Mrs. Lam, and a few pro-establishment politicians have called for a shake-up of her senior advisers. Mrs. Lam has suspended the bill indefinitely but not fully withdrawn it, and in a briefing with reporters on Tuesday did not indicate any willingness to make further concessions.
Asked if she would restart political reforms to give the people of Hong Kong universal suffrage, Mrs. Lam sidestepped the question, but acknowledged that there were “fundamental deep-seated problems” that could be related to the economy, cost of living or politics.
Protesters and pro-democracy lawmakers want to protect the high degree of autonomy Hong Kong was promised when it was returned to China in 1997 under a policy known as “one country, two systems.” That autonomy is guaranteed until 2047, but the Communist Party and its security apparatus have increasingly encroached on the territory.
The last sustained protest movement demanding a direct say in the election of the territory’s chief executive ended in failure in 2014. Since then, Beijing has intervened to remove six politicians elected to Hong Kong’s legislature, a major setback for the opposition. Several others were disqualified from running in local elections by officials who questioned the sincerity of their belief that Hong Kong is an “inalienable part” of China.
As a result, protesters and experts say, the political playing field is so far out of balance that many of Hong Kong’s youth have felt shut out, and blame the generations of politicians before them for compromising their futures for the sake of seeking Beijing’s favor.
The experts and protesters say this may help explain why, when those frustrations boiled over at the legislature last week, many others in the movement remained sympathetic, seeing it as a culmination of years of pent-up anger.
“At first, I was shocked by their behavior too, but then I understood,” said Candy Wong, 56, a dentist and mother of two who joined a rally of thousands of parents on Friday to express support for the protesters.
Some politicians in the pro-establishment camp, possibly with an eye on future elections, have also spoken out about the need for the government to tackle the political structure that is the root cause of the protesters’ anger.
Jasper Tsang, a former president of the Legislative Council and a founding member of the largest pro-Beijing party in Hong Kong, turned heads last week when he raised the possibility of revisiting the debate over political reform.
“One of the main reasons there is so much anger is that the Hong Kong people, especially the youth, haven’t been given any hope for universal suffrage,” Mr. Tsang told HK01, a local news site.
Ronny Tong, a lawyer and member of the chief executive’s top advisory body, the Executive Council, echoed that suggestion.
Samson Yuen, an assistant professor of political science at Lingnan University in Hong Kong who studies local social movements, said most protesters agreed that Hong Kong needed more democracy but that some were concerned it could distract from the movement’s more achievable demands.
“There have been a lot of splits even within the protesters regarding whether people should shift their demands to asking for democracy because that’s not what this movement is for,” Mr. Yuen said.
There is also the question of what political reform would even look like. Beijing once offered a form of direct elections that would have allowed the public to elect Hong Kong’s chief executive from a slate of two or three preapproved candidates.
But pro-democracy legislators voted down the measure in 2015, and Beijing’s supporters in the legislature said then that the Communist Party was unlikely to offer more generous terms. Since then, Hong Kong has continued to rely on a 1,200-member committee heavily weighted in Beijing’s favor to pick its chief executive.
In an editorial on Monday, the pro-Beijing Hong Kong newspaper Wen Wei Po dismissed the calls for universal suffrage as irrelevant and having no legal basis. The paper argued that no city leader or government would “be able to, or have the authority to” agree to such a demand.
The way to resolve the issue is to improve the government’s communication with the public, Mr. Lau and others said.
“None of our leaders have been able to articulate a vision of our future under ‘one country, two systems’ which has been inspiring to our young people,” said Regina Ip, a pro-establishment lawmaker and another member of the Executive Council.
Calls for political reforms are likely to be rejected by the Chinese leadership under Xi Jinping, who has strengthened authoritarian controls across China since coming to power in 2012, experts said.
Mr. Xi has already made an extraordinary concession to the protesters by allowing Mrs. Lam to suspend the bill, said Ma Ngok, an associate professor of government at the Chinese University of Hong Kong. So the chances that Mr. Xi would agree to political reforms, Mr. Ma said, are slim.
