Media|Coming Soon to a Theater Near You. Very Soon.
Coming Soon to a Theater Near You. Very Soon.
“Suicide Squad,” released by Warner Bros. in 2016, had a 13-month marketing campaign. Hollywood’s top marketers say that drawn-out campaigns no longer make sense for most movies.Credit...Clay Enos/Warner Bros.
LOS ANGELES — Conventional wisdom in Hollywood has long held that big, lumbering “tentpole” movies require protracted promotional campaigns.
Walt Disney Studios spent more than three years promoting “Tron: Legacy,” which came out in 2010. Warner Bros. began beating the drums for “Godzilla” nearly two years before its 2014 release. Universal Pictures first publicized “The Secret Life of Pets 2” in August 2016; it arrived last month.
Shorter campaigns are becoming “the new normal,” he said. His push for “Cats” started this week with the release of a provocative trailer that tore across the internet. “Cats,” a big-budget adaptation of the Andrew Lloyd Webber musical, will arrive in theaters on Dec. 20. Universal is also planning more compact advertising windows for “Minions: The Rise of Gru” and “Fast & Furious 9,” both due next year.
Blair Rich, Warner’s worldwide marketing chief, said that she started to recalibrate campaign length after analyzing how materials were reverberating online.
Ms. Rich gave “Aquaman” a five-month campaign last year, a gutsy move for a movie about a character without the profile of a Batman or Superman. The result was striking: $1.1 billion in worldwide ticket sales. To compare, “Suicide Squad,” released by Warner in 2016 to $747 million in ticket sales, had a 13-month campaign.
For the year, Warner is second in domestic market share. Universal is a whisper behind. The leader is Disney, where Asad Ayaz runs worldwide marketing.
Mr. Ayaz cited “Avengers: Endgame” as an example of a late-breaking campaign. The promotional onslaught started in December, and the Marvel movie arrived in theaters in late April. “Endgame” took in $2.8 billion worldwide.
Disney has truncated campaigns for Marvel movies for three reasons. Certain characters — Iron Man, Captain America, Hulk — already command significant audience awareness. Because Marvel movies have been arriving at a steady clip, one organically promotes the next. Long promotional pushes would also overlap, resulting in fan confusion, Mr. Ayaz said.
It is notable that Mr. Ayaz, Ms. Rich and Mr. Moses were each named to their positions last year, amounting to generational change. The new regime — under more pressure to control costs than their predecessors — is more comfortable with internet analytics and adjusting marketing plans accordingly.
Shorter does not necessarily mean less. “Endgame” may have started late, but the advertising bombardment was aggressive when it did arrive. The biggest Universal movies receive a three-week barrage of “symphony” marketing support leading up to release from other NBCUniversal divisions, which include cable networks and theme parks.
And the marketing chiefs emphasized that one size does not fit all. There will continue to be different timelines for different films. Universal has given “Fast & Furious Presents: Hobbs & Shaw” a longer campaign, in part because it’s a spinoff and not a sequel. Mr. Moses released the first trailer for “Trolls World Tour” in June — the animated movie does not arrive until April — in part because Universal wants to expand the “Trolls” audience beyond primarily young girls.
Adding to the squishiness, studios measure campaign length in different ways. Most consider the first trailer the start; others count teaser posters and early magazine photo spreads as the kickoff.
But the trend is pronounced. Look at how studios have changed their approach to Comic-Con International, the annual convention for pop culture enthusiasts that began on Thursday in San Diego. The carnival-like event, which ends on Sunday, was once seen by Hollywood’s top marketers as a crucial launching pad. It’s where Disney pushed “Tron: Legacy” for three years running starting in 2008.
This year, Universal, Warner Bros., Sony Pictures and Lionsgate decided not to mount presentations.
She pointed to “Wonder Woman 1984,” which Warner plans to release in June. Instead of flying the sequel’s director (Patty Jenkins) and star (Gal Gadot) to Comic-Con to unveil footage, as it most likely would have in the past, Warner had Ms. Jenkins post a teaser image on Twitter.