Wesley Gullett, who is listed in court documents as the president of the New Aryan Empire, was taken into custody without incident on Thursday, the Dover Marshal’s Office said.
The leader of a white supremacist gang in Arkansas who escaped from a county jail earlier this week was captured on Thursday, but a second inmate remains a fugitive, the authorities said.
The captured inmate, Wesley Gullett, was spotted by the chief marshal of Dover, Ark., David Dalrymple, during a routine patrol around 11:30 a.m., according to Lt. Todd Steffy of the Dover Marshal’s Office.
Mr. Gullett was taken into custody without incident, Lieutenant Steffy said in an interview Thursday. The other escapee, Christopher Sanderson, a felon who is facing a firearms possession charge in an unrelated case, remains a fugitive.
There had been a $10,000 reward for information leading to the capture of Mr. Gullett, 30, whom prosecutors identified as the president of the New Aryan Empire, and who was ensnared earlier this year in a roundup of 54 members of the hate group. Mr. Gullett is facing charges of attempted murder, illegal drug distribution and racketeering.
There is a $5,000 reward for information leading to the capture of Mr. Sanderson.
Dover is about 125 miles from the Jefferson County Detention Center in Pine Bluff, Ark., which Mr. Gullett and Mr. Sanderson escaped from earlier this week.
Mr. Gullett was being held on Thursday at the Pope County Detention Center in Russellville, Ark., Lt. Steffy said.
The Marshals Service was informed of the escape at 4:30 a.m. on Wednesday, according to The Associated Press, though it is unclear when the escape occurred.
“We were made aware this morning of the inmates’ escape and are working with our federal, state, and local law enforcement partners to secure their return into custody,” Cody Hiland, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Arkansas, said in a statement on Wednesday.
A spokeswoman for the Jefferson County Sheriff’s Office did not immediately respond to a request for comment on Wednesday, but the Jefferson County sheriff, Lafayette Woods Jr., told The Pine Bluff Commercial that the escapees put “dummy bodies” in their beds during a bed check. The sheriff said a staffing shortage and delayed renovations to the jail due to a funding crunch left the facility vulnerable to an escape. Pine Bluff is about 43 miles southeast of Little Rock.
Leslie Borgognoni, a lawyer for Mr. Gullett, declined to comment on Wednesday.
In an indictment unsealed in February, prosecutors said the New Aryan Empire sold “copious amounts” of methamphetamine around the Arkansas River Valley. The group, known as N.A.E., has been compared by authorities to gangs like MS-13, the Bloods, the Crips and the Aryan Brotherhood.
Mr. Gullett is accused of plotting the attempted murder of Bruce Wayne Hurley, a government informant who was killed in 2016. Mr. Hurley’s killer was not identified in the indictment.