The decision may have broader implications for how the First Amendment applies to officials’ accounts in the social-media era.
Because Mr. Trump uses Twitter to conduct government business, he cannot exclude some Americans from reading his posts — and engaging in conversations in the replies to them — because he does not like their views, a three-judge panel on the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, ruled unanimously.
The First Amendment prohibits an official who uses a social media account for government purposes from excluding people from an “otherwise open online dialogue” because they say things that the official finds objectionable, Judge Parker wrote.
The Justice Department expressed disappointment in the ruling but said officials had not yet decided whether to appeal to the full appeals court or the Supreme Court.
But Jameel Jaffer, the director of the Knight First Amendment Institute at Columbia University, which represented a group of Twitter users who were blocked by Mr. Trump and filed the lawsuit, praised the ruling. He said that public officials’ social-media accounts are among the most significant forums for the public to discuss government policy.
Against that backdrop, a group of Twitter users whom Mr. Trump had blocked from accessing his postings asked the White House to be unblocked and then, when their request went unheeded, sued the president.
The plaintiffs included Rebecca Buckwalter, a fellow at the liberal Center for American Progress. Her account was blocked after she responded to a tweet by Mr. Trump on June 6, 2017, in which he accused various mainstream news media outlets of being “fake news” and said he would not have won the White House if he had relied on them.
But the appeals court disagreed, saying Mr. Trump was clearly acting in a government capacity in his use of Twitter.
Judge Parker was appointed by former President George W. Bush. He was joined in the opinion by Judges Peter Hall, another Bush appointee, and Christopher Droney, an appointee of former President Barack Obama. The district court judge whose earlier ruling the panel affirmed was Naomi Buchwald, a Clinton appointee.
Courts have increasingly been grappling with how to apply the First Amendment, written in the 18th century, to the social-media era. In 2017, for example, the Supreme Court unanimously struck down a North Carolina law that had made it a crime for registered sex offenders to use websites like Facebook.
In January, a panel on the Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit, in Richmond, Va., issued a similar ruling in a much smaller-scale case, barring the chairwoman of a board of county supervisors from blocking a critic from a Facebook page she administered. The Knight First Amendment Institute also represented that plaintiff.
In a concurring opinion in the earlier case, Judge Barbara Milano Keenan said the Supreme Court will eventually need to address many difficult issues raised by officials’ use of social-media services. Among others, she questioned whether such companies’ policies of restricting users deemed to use hate speech from their platforms raised a constitutional problem.
