The metal detector at the Jackson County Detention Center in Kansas City, Mo., beeped repeatedly when Laurie Snell, a lawyer, tried to enter the facility on May 31.
She was passing through security on her way to visit a client, but something she was wearing was setting off the detector. She removed her shoes, her jewelry and her glasses. Then she realized the problem was her bra.
So Ms. Snell ducked into a bathroom, removed the undergarment and put it into a bin for the X-ray machine. That got her through security. Then, in the privacy of an elevator cabin, she wriggled back into the bra as quickly as she could.
“Thankfully my client was on seven, which is the top floor,” she said.
Ms. Snell was among the first to point out that the metal detector at the detention center was reacting to women’s bras. She was not the last. Over the past two months, the issue has spawned a legislative debate, a public protest and a deadlock between a group of lawyers and the county authorities.
The standoff, nicknamed “Bra-Gate,” echoed other episodes in Pennsylvania, Maine and Australia, where bras have fueled similar debates over security, privacy and gender discrimination. In Kansas City, the situation took on additional legal significance when a lawyer announced on Friday that a sex discrimination complaint had been filed on behalf of a corrections employee.
The employee, Charlotte Hardin, is a legal librarian who removed her bra to pass through security. The lawsuit was filed against the county last month, after she was put on administrative leave, her lawyer said.
Diana Turner, the director of the Jackson County Corrections Department, said she could not comment on the complaint except to say that Ms. Hardin was not placed on leave for putting her bra through the X-ray.
The Jackson County Detention Center had reportedly been struggling with serious safety and security issues when Sheriff Darryl Forté took over administration of the jail in January. A new policy in mid-May required everyone entering the facility — including lawyers with credentials — to pass through the metal detector.
Ms. Snell, the lawyer, said she accepted that decision but did not understand why security agents could not use a wand metal detector or a pat-down — as many airports do — to clear women who had set off the main metal detector.
Not every bra has the type of metal underwire that sets off the detector in Kansas City. Ms. Turner said that people passed through the detention facility’s detector more than 700 times a day on average, and that the vast majority of them had no problem at all.
Wands were not a good option either, she said, because they could not differentiate between underwire and a contraband item. And she added that lawyers who cannot pass through the metal detector are still allowed to interact with their clients through plexiglass.
Tracy Spradlin, a lawyer who regularly visits clients in the detention center, said that was not a fair option. “We cannot meaningfully exchange documents with them that way, and we cannot have free conversations,” she said, adding that the new policy disproportionately affects women in what is already a male-dominated field.
On June 12, dozens of lawyers opposed to the policy demonstrated in front of the Jackson County Courthouse in Kansas City. “We need support,” they chanted. Some of their signs mentioned the Sixth Amendment, which guarantees the right to a speedy trial — a nod to the fact that if female lawyers cannot get through security for in-person consultations, their clients suffer, too.
Neither Ms. Spradlin nor Ms. Hastings has had a problem getting through the metal detector, nor did they know how many women were affected in total. But Ms. Hastings said she knew of more than a dozen, and Ms. Spradlin pointed out that facility employees, whose paychecks depend on corrections authorities, might be reluctant to speak up if there were a problem.
Ms. Hastings said county officials have been incommunicative and resistant to even simple solutions, like implementing a second screening method.
“The complete refusal to be reasonable — that’s just been mind-boggling,” she said.