A man has confessed to raping and killing an American scientist whose body was found last week in a cave on the island of Crete, the authorities said on Tuesday.
The disappearance of Suzanne Eaton, 59, a prominent developmental biologist who had been in Crete for a conference, set off an international online campaign by friends and family members to find her. Her remains were discovered on July 8, six days after she was last seen alive.
A coroner found that she had died of asphyxiation, and ruled that her death had resulted from a criminal act.
She had also suffered multiple rib and facial fractures as well as upper limb injuries, and had possibly been a victim of sexual abuse, the police said in a statement on Tuesday. They said the suspect had admitted to hitting her with his car, to disable her so that he could rape her.
A 27-year-old man confessed to the crime after he was arrested on Monday as the main suspect for her killing, the director of Crete’s police force, Konstantinos Lagoudakis, said in the statement.
Local news reports described the suspect, whose name was not released, as a farmer with two children who is the son of a priest.
Professor Eaton, who had a black belt in taekwondo, was last seen on July 2, having lunch at the Orthodox Academy of Crete, which was hosting the conference. The academy, outside the small town of Kolymvari in the northwestern part of the island, is nestled between the rocky shoreline and rugged hills.
She apparently went on her daily, 30-minute run — her running shoes were missing from her room, but her passport, wallet, phone and cycling shoes were still there, her family said in a Facebook post three days after her disappearance. She never returned.
After Professor Eaton was reported missing on July 4, according to the police, her family and colleagues raised 50,000 euros to give as a reward for her recovery. A “Searching for Suzanne” Facebook group was also created, where users discussed theories and possible trails she might have taken during her run.
In his confession, according to the police, the suspect said he saw her around noon heading toward a monument to the fallen Greek cadets of World War II, about a mile away from the academy, and hit her twice with his car.
He put her in his car trunk and moved her to a cave, about six miles away from the conference center, that had been used as a bunker in World War II, the police said. They said he told officers that he had raped her before throwing her in the ventilation shaft of the cave and replacing its seal.
Her body was found there on July 8 by amateur cave explorers who then notified the police, Mr. Lagoudakis added. He said that tire tracks at the site were a key piece of evidence in the investigation.
Professor Eaton led a research group at the Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics in Dresden, Germany, and was a professor at the Biotechnology Center of the Dresden University of Technology.
She lived in Dresden with her husband, Anthony Hyman, also a biologist, and their two children.
Originally from California, she graduated from Brown University and earned a doctorate at the University of California Los Angeles.
