Weather: Expect sunshine and highs that could rise to 90 or higher.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until Aug. 11.
Are you ready for the first heat wave of the year?
Temperatures are expected to climb above 90 degrees during the week, and over 95 degrees on the weekend.
When is a heat wave declared?
The designation happens when the temperature reaches at least 90 degrees for three consecutive days. Between 1876 and 2011, there were 263 heat waves in New York City, according to the National Weather Service.
Most of those heat waves lasted three days. One lasted 12 days.
What are the temperatures going to be this week?
Today’s high temperature will be near 90 degrees, the Weather Service predicted. Tomorrow it may hit a high of 91 degrees. Thursday may be a little cooler, at 85 degrees.
After that, watch out. The temperature really starts to increase: Friday through Sunday, the highs could reach 95 degrees or more.
Upper Manhattan and the Bronx are “particularly heat sensitive,” according to Jaime Madrigano, a policy researcher at the RAND Corporation who was featured in a video by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
How can I cool off?
Parks with sprinklers! The city’s Parks Department has a website listing each park with spray showers, which spout clean, cool water. They operate on days when it’s 80 degrees or higher. And they’re free.
So are the city’s public pools, which my colleague Corey Kilgannon recently explored.
Public libraries are excellent indoor alternatives.
New York Public Library branches (Manhattan, the Bronx and Staten Island) are listed here; branches of the Brooklyn Public Library are listed here; and the Queens Public Library branches are listed here.
Drinking plenty of water is essential. Mint leaves or sliced lemons and limes can add flavor without adding sugar. Sorry, folks: Beer may feel refreshing, but it’s not ideal for hydrating purposes.
When was the longest heat wave?
New York City’s longest heat wave lasted 12 days. It started on Aug. 24, 1953, and ended on Sept. 4. Temperatures reached 100 degrees, and then 102 degrees, before waning.
On six of those days, the temperature was 98 degrees or higher.
Jeffrey Epstein’s safe had ‘piles of cash’ and a fake passport, prosecutors say. The passport appeared to have Mr. Epstein’s photo, but it had a different name and listed a residence of Saudi Arabia.
Abel Cedeno cited anti-gay bullying in the stabbing death of a high school classmate. He was found guilty.
The race for an open congressional seat in the Bronx will feature two very different Democrats: Ritchie Torres, a gay councilman, and Rubén Díaz Sr., who says he doesn’t believe in gay marriage.
Usually, when two powerful forces meet, one yields. Usually.
In the late 1980s, Audre Lorde — the black, lesbian feminist writer who later became New York State’s first poet laureate — was reading a poem at Stanford University in California when an earthquake struck.
“She did not stop reading the poem, and there were people, like, fleeing,” Jacqueline N. Brown, who was a graduate student at Stanford at the time, recalled recently.
The opening line itself feels like it can move the earth.
“Her words continue to inspire me,” Ms. Howard said.
Ms. Lorde died of cancer in 1992, one year after being named poet laureate.
A discussion titled “Politics and Poetry: Legacies of Audre Lorde” will begin at 5:30 p.m. tonight at the Stapleton Library, at 132 Canal Street on Staten Island. Among the featured speakers will be Ms. Howard and Gena Mimozo, deputy director of Staten Island Arts.
Metropolitan Diary: Partied out N.Y.C.
