Jonathan Daniel Weed and Robert Brian Niles were married July 27 at Kleinhans Music Hall in Buffalo. Judge J. Paul Oetken of the United States District Court for the Southern District of New York, for whom Mr. Niles served as a law clerk, officiated at a ceremony incorporating Jewish and Christian traditions.
In September, Mr. Weed (left), 31, is to begin work as an assistant professor of mathematics and data science at N.Y.U. He graduated magna cum laude from Princeton and received a Ph.D. in mathematics and statistics at M.I.T.
He is the son of Debra L. Weed and Daniel M. Weed of San Jose, Calif. Mr. Weed’s mother, who was a stay-at-home parent, until 1994 worked as a layout designer at Cypress Semiconductor in San Jose. She now volunteers as a Roman Catholic chaplain at various Santa Clara County jails. His father retired as the director of design at Global Foundries, a semiconductor company in Santa Clara, Calif.
Until this month, Mr. Niles, 30, served as a law clerk for Justice Elena Kagan of the Supreme Court. He graduated magna cum laude from Harvard, from which he also received a law degree magna cum laude and an M.B.A.
He is a son of Ellen L. Niles and Dr. Charles R. Niles of Buffalo. Mr. Niles’s father, an ophthalmologist specializing in glaucoma surgery, is the president of Ophthalmology Associates of Western New York, a group practice in Williamsville, N.Y., of which the groom’s mother is the head administrator. He is also a clinical assistant professor in the department of ophthalmology at the University at Buffalo School of Medicine and Biomedical Sciences.
The couple will be taking the name Niles-Weed.
In fall 2011, a mutual friend of the couple encouraged them to meet for a drink in New York, but with busy schedules it took until the following April for them to get together. Their connection was immediate, and Mr. Weed skipped a book club meeting for their second date to see Mozart’s “Don Giovanni” at Juilliard. Although Mr. Niles planned to move to Boston in a few weeks, they decided to give their relationship a shot. Six years later they announced their engagement at a dinner with their parents and siblings in Washington.