New York Today|Commuting Delays and Cancellations: Is the ‘Summer of Hell’ Back?
Commuting Delays and Cancellations: Is the ‘Summer of Hell’ Back?
It’s Monday. The Queens district attorney primary was nearly two weeks ago, and votes are still being counted.
Weather: A possibility of showers during the morning commute, then partly sunny skies. Expect a high around 80.
A fire near Trenton last week caused delays at Pennsylvania Station in Midtown Manhattan that were “so crazy the National Guard was needed to contain the crowds,” a CBS New York reporter said.
Two days later, a garbage truck crashed nose-first on the New Jersey side of the Lincoln Tunnel, forcing a multiple-hour shutdown of the Port Authority Bus Terminal.
And New Jersey Transit canceled more than 60 trains last week, mostly because equipment or personnel were not available, my colleague Patrick McGeehan reported.
More than 900,000 people commute on New Jersey Transit trains and buses each weekday.
The commuters heading to New York usually enter the city at Port Authority or Penn Station. Because they are near each other, a problem at one location can overwhelm the other with thousands of displaced travelers.
On a day in mid-June, problems with overhead wires stopped New Jersey Transit and Amtrak service in and out of Penn Station. Delays started about 10 a.m. and lasted into the evening. “Some passengers waited two hours before their trains began moving again,” ABC 7 reported.
After the fire in Trenton on July 1, the National Guard was called to the station to prevent “people from entering the tracks and, later, kick people out due to overcrowding on the few trains that did arrive,” according to CBS New York.
Then two days later, the garbage truck crash forced the Port Authority shutdown.
How much money would it take to alleviate problems on New Jersey Transit?
Nick Sifuentes, executive director of the Tri-State Transportation Campaign, an advocacy group, said it would cost about $700 million to bring New Jersey Transit into a state of good repairs.
Decisions made years ago caused the current problems, he added. “Decades of underfunding have left N.J. Transit scrambling to even make money to pay the people that work there, much less do any new big projects,” he said.
And there are not enough people working there.
No one is building additional tunnels or train lines between New York and New Jersey.
New Jersey Transit said nearly a dozen new engineers were driving trains, and more were being trained.
The United States women’s soccer team, which claimed its fourth World Cup title yesterday, will get a ticker-tape parade in New York City.
Jeffrey Epstein, the billionaire financier, is accused of luring girls to his Manhattan mansion and abusing them.
El Chapo earned $12,666,181,704, prosecutors say. They want him to pay it back.
For the first time in six years, every Democrat in the New York State Senate is working with the Democratic conference.
In 1965, a research psychologist at Columbia-Presbyterian Medical Center thought Jesus was talking to her.
In the years since, countless people have found comfort and empowerment in the book. Among them was Marianne Williamson, one of the two dozen people running for president.
I have never read the book, but those words sounded familiar. Then I realized I had heard them before … in a rap song.
My mom’s family is Jewish, my dad’s family is Muslim and I went to an all-boys Catholic high school. But, because of my obsession with politics and rap music, I’ve also been exposed to copious amounts of New York mysticism.
It’s Monday — please take notes.
I grew up in a small town in Kentucky in the 1950s. My parents knew nothing about classical music, but they thought they should offer it to their children. They acquired a long-playing record for that purpose, to no avail. At college, in Virginia, I was required to take a music appreciation class. Again, it got a big yawn from me.
In 1965, having moved to New York City in an act of blind optimism, I was riding in a yellow cab when I heard something on the radio that electrified me. I had to know what it was. I asked the driver.
“That’s Bach,” he said.
I have to hear a lot more of that, I thought. And I did.
Years later, I met a man through the Classical Music Lovers’ Exchange. We had both listed “Don Carlo” as our favorite opera. I lived near Lincoln Center, and when he went to the opera with his brother, his brother would leave before the last act, handing me his ticket on the way out.
The man, whom I later married, had second-acted Broadway plays as a Stuyvesant High School student. Now I was last-acting the Metropolitan Opera.
