BERLIN — Angela Merkel has not stopped.
After a second episode in which Ms. Merkel, Germany’s chancellor, trembled uncontrollably in public last week, she headed to the airport, took a 12-hour flight to Japan, held 10 bilateral meetings and four group sessions with world leaders, including President Trump, then flew back to Europe for a record-breaking 20-hour negotiation with her European counterparts in Brussels.
The last several days have been a reminder of Ms. Merkel’s storied stamina, proven in countless crisis summits during her 14 years in office.
But they also reinforce the mystery of what exactly is going on with the health of the woman who has been the rock of European politics at a time when the authority of both her party and her country appear to be declining.
“When Angela Merkel trembles, the whole union trembles,” Stephan-Andreas Casdorff wrote in the Tagesspiegel newspaper.
On the surface, Ms. Merkel’s two recent trembling episodes within the space of 10 days, which followed a previous incident two years ago in Mexico, have been a strikingly low-key affair in Germany, a country fiercely protective of privacy.
“I am doing fine,” she said.
But under the surface, the images of the chancellor’s moments of physical vulnerability have become symbolic of her party’s and country’s political frailty — and an occasion to revisit the topic of her succession.
In Brussels this week, Ms. Merkel, 64, failed to muster her hallmark consensus-building powers and steer her peers even to her second-choice candidate for the European Union’s top job. Still, in the final hours of negotiations on Tuesday, her influence proved important in getting a German, her defense minister, Ursula von der Leyen, nominated as the president of the powerful European Commission. But domestically, opinion polls now regularly put Ms. Merkel’s conservatives in second place behind the liberal Greens.
Ms. Merkel’s anointed successor, Annegret Kramp-Karrenbauer, who last fall won the contest to succeed the chancellor as head of their conservative party, has seen her approval rating drop sharply in recent weeks as questions about her capacity to lead the party into the next election have grown louder.
Possible rivals — like Armin Laschet, the leader of Germany’s most populous state, North-Rhine Westphalia, and Markus Söder, the leader of Bavaria’s conservatives, who pair with Ms. Merkel’s party nationally — are being floated as alternative candidates for the chancellery, an office traditionally tied to party leadership.
In the meantime, Ms. Merkel, freed from having to run the party and organize the next election, has seen her popularity bounce back — only reinforcing the contrast with the embattled Ms. Kramp-Karrenbauer.
The qualification, which barely registered at the time, now has a different ring to it.
The flip side of Ms. Merkel’s commitment to serving out her fourth term until 2021, said Nico Fried, a commentator in the Süddeutsche Zeitung newspaper, is “the promise to quit” if her physical strength reaches its limit.
Others were less forgiving. Christopher Schwennicke, the editor of the magazine Cicero, compared the chancellery’s communication strategy to that of a Russian government that for years covered over the poor health of President Vladimir V. Putin’s predecessor, Boris Yeltsin.
Germany is fiercely protective of privacy, and health has always been considered a private matter in the country.
In the 1970s, Chancellor Willy Brandt suffered from grave depression and had multiple affairs, something that was well-known in journalists’ circles during his time in office but was not publicly discussed.
His successor, Chancellor Helmut Schmidt, had a heart ailment that resulted in him being found unconscious in his office multiple times. But again, the news media did not write about his health until after he left office.
Over time, the taboo softened as some German politicians became more open about their health. President Frank-Walter Steinmeier spoke publicly about donating a kidney to his wife. Wolfgang Schäuble, the veteran lawmaker and former finance minister, has used a wheelchair for decades. And Malu Dreyer, one of Germany’s 16 state governors, publicly announced that she had multiple sclerosis.
But Ms. Merkel has taken privacy to another level — and not just on her health, her biographers say.
There is no official doctor attached to the chancellery. “No one knows who her doctor is,” said Stefan Kornelius, a Merkel biographer and the foreign editor of the Süddeutsche Zeitung.
When she broke her pelvis in 2014 while cross-country skiing, it was reported that the file created in the hospital where she was treated was labeled with a fake name.
After her most recent trembling incident, Ms. Merkel boarded a flight to Japan that arrived at 8 a.m. local time — 1 a.m. Berlin time — and went straight into her first day of meetings. “Other leaders came a day early to sleep off the jet lag,” Mr. Kornelius said.
Her attachment to privacy extends to other parts of her life, too.
Little is known about her husband, Joachim Sauer, beyond his being a chemist and Wagner enthusiast. He is rarely seen in public.
And for about four weeks, the public did not even know the chancellor’s whereabouts until she was spotted in a Berlin department store, he said.
“Can you imagine this being the case for an American president?” he said.
Although Mr. Trump does not disclose the full details of his health, when Hillary Clinton came down with pneumonia during the 2016 presidential campaign and disappeared from the news media’s sight for 90 minutes — to her daughter’s apartment to rest, it turned out — it caused a storm.
Evelyn Roll, another Merkel biographer, recalled writing emails to the chancellor’s husband every three months for years to request an interview, to no avail. In the end she asked for a conversation “only on chemistry,” but that, too, was politely declined.
Another reason there is no hysteria over the chancellor’s health may be that many Germans still trust in the stability and continuity of their political institutions.
“That has been the German experience over the last 70 years,” said Paul Nolte, a historian at the Free University of Berlin.
That factor could soon be a thing of the past in Europe’s newly fragmented political reality. Ms. Merkel’s underlying political weakness is undeniable by now, Mr. Kornelius said.
But after powering through possibly the most grueling week of travel and meetings of her chancellorship, Ms. Merkel not only proved her physical resilience once again; she also turned a stinging political defeat over her party’s preferred candidate into an unexpected last-minute victory by securing the top job for Germany anyway.
