LOS ANGELES — Walt Disney’s grandniece Abigail Disney, a critic of income inequality in general and the Walt Disney Company’s pay practices in particular, castigated the conglomerate anew on Monday, saying she came away “livid” about wages after a visit to Disneyland.
Ms. Disney, the granddaughter of Roy O. Disney, who founded the entertainment company in 1923 with his brother Walt, appeared on the Yahoo News video series “Through Her Eyes” this week. The interview touched on a range of sensitive topics — her archly conservative parents were, at times, abusive alcoholics, she said — but her comments about wages for Disneyland workers in California were widely picked up online.
“At a company that has never been more profitable, there is no excuse for any employee to be using food stamps, to be doubling up on housing,” Abigail Disney said this week.
Ms. Disney, 59, did not say whether she spoke to full- or part-time workers. Her visit occurred sometime last year. For much of 2018, Disneyland was engaged in contract negotiations with five unions that represent its workers. New multiyear deals were eventually reached with all of them, with Disney agreeing to increase starting hourly pay to a minimum of $15, from $13.25.
Ms. Disney did not respond to an interview request on Wednesday. The Yahoo interviewer, Zainab Salbi, initially described Ms. Disney’s theme park visit as “undercover” but corrected herself on Wednesday in a Twitter post. “For the record, she NEVER said she went ‘undercover’ to Anaheim,” Ms. Salbi wrote.
The Disney family has not been involved in managing the company since Roy E. Disney, Ms. Disney’s father, stepped down from the board in 2003. He subsequently led a shareholder revolt that resulted in Michael D. Eisner’s resignation as chief executive and Robert A. Iger’s ascendance to the top of the company. Roy E. Disney died in 2009.
Ms. Disney is the director of a 2014 documentary, “The Armor of Light,” that follows an anti-abortion activist and a supporter of abortion rights. She has recently started to work on a possible documentary about income inequality.
She is also a founder of Level Forward, a start-up that backs media projects — films, stage shows, podcasts — driven by women and people of color.