Julián Castro on Wednesday night criticized former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. over his record, using a question on immigration during the Democratic debate to mount an attack that others in the race have used to great success.
Mr. Biden’s four-plus decades in office have been ripe for criticism during the Democratic primary contest. Senator Kamala Harris of California took aim at his record on busing during a debate in June, and Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey has repeatedly gone after his record on criminal justice.
Biden: I found that Julián, excuse me, the secretary, we sat together in many meetings, I never heard him talk about any of this when he was the secretary. The fact is, what the senator from New York talked about is seeking asylum. The women she spoke to are entitled to asylum. That is not crossing the border illegally. What we should do is flood the zone to make sure that we have people to make those decisions quickly.
Castro: First of all, Mr. Vice President, it looks like one of us has learned from the lessons of the past and one of us hasn’t. Let me begin by telling you — let me just start out by answering that question. My immigration plan would also fix the broken legal immigration system, because we do have a problem with that. Secondly, the only way that we’re going to guarantee that these kinds of family separations don’t happen in the future is that we need to repeal this law. There’s still going to be consequences if somebody crosses the border. It’s a civil action. Also, we have 654 miles of fencing. We have thousands of personnel at the border. We have planes, we have boats, we have helicopters, we have security cameras. What we need are politicians that actually have some guts on this issue.
Biden: I have guts enough to say his plan doesn’t make sense. Here’s the deal: The fact of the matter is, that in fact when people cross the border illegally, it is illegal to do it unless they’re seeking asylum. People should have to get in line. That’s the problem. And the only reason this particular part of the law is being abused is because of Donald Trump. We should defeat Donald Trump and end this practice.