What could be more American than vowing to go to the moon and beyond on the Fourth of July? For Mr. Trump, it was a chance to channel his inner John F. Kennedy, who first made the moon the nation’s goal — to make the sort of bold promise that appeals to his own sense of greatness and to wrap himself in a part of Americana akin to baseball and apple pie.
But Mr. Trump is the 10th president since Kennedy to put his stamp on the space program and the latest to aim for the stars with more brio than blueprint. After the Apollo program ended, other presidents promised to go back to the moon — or send humans to Mars or even land astronauts on asteroids. None did, unwilling or unable to obtain the financing necessary, and it remains uncertain whether Mr. Trump will, either.
As the nation on Saturday celebrates the 50th anniversary of the Apollo 11 landing, the story of presidents and space exploration in the subsequent five decades is one of fascination, frustration and futility, an unrequited romance as star-struck chief executives dreamed of recapturing the magic of Kennedy’s moonshot without summoning the resources or the national will that made it possible in 1969, almost six years after his death.
The presidents who followed Kennedy accomplished remarkable things in space, including the development of the reusable space shuttle, the launch of the Hubble Space Telescope and its offspring, the robot exploration of the solar system and the construction of the International Space Station along with Russia and other partners. Yet none of it ever fired the national imagination as did humans traveling to other worlds.
Advocates of space exploration hope Mr. Trump will succeed with his moon program, called Artemis, for the mythical Apollo’s goddess sister, if for no other reason than his relentlessness when he applies himself to a project or a cause. Being the president who returned humanity to the moon on the way to Mars would be the sort of splashy, high-profile spectacle that excites him.
Mr. Trump hosted Buzz Aldrin, Michael Collins and the family of Neil Armstrong on Friday in the Oval Office to mark what the president called “one of the great achievements ever.” Vice President Mike Pence, who heads a reconstituted National Space Council, plans to visit the Kennedy Space Center in Florida on Saturday.
“NASA is back,” Mr. Trump boasted.
The hurdles, however, remain sky-high. Mr. Pence told NASA in March to accelerate its schedule to reach the moon by 2024, the end of Mr. Trump’s second term if he wins re-election. NASA shook up its management to meet that goal. But Congress has shown less interest in financing it, and the technical obstacles to such a timetable remain formidable.
Kennedy was “not that interested in space.” He was keen to compete.
For Kennedy, it was all about Cold War competition. “I’m not that interested in space,” he told his NASA administrator in a private meeting, where he made clear that space priorities other than a lunar landing meant little to him — as did arriving on the moon second.
Because of an assassin’s bullet, though, it fell to his successor, Lyndon B. Johnson — who unlike Kennedy was genuinely invested in space — to build the moon program into what it would be. While the space project enjoyed only shallow public support given its cost, the assassination made it a moral imperative to fulfill the martyred leader’s vision.
But it would be their mutual rival, Richard M. Nixon, who would preside over the actual landing on July 20, 1969. Nixon relished making what he called the “most historic phone call ever made from the White House” to speak with Mr. Armstrong and Mr. Aldrin on the moon. But beyond that, Nixon was not especially engaged in the space program, which was seen as a Kennedy legacy.
In March 1970, less than a year after the first landing, Nixon signed a directive making space just another program that would compete for funding along with every other, the turning point to Mr. Logsdon. As interest and television ratings for subsequent Apollo launches dwindled, the final three moon missions were scrapped, ending the program with Apollo 17 in 1972.
Nixon did authorize the development of the space shuttle, the principal path to space for Americans for decades to come, and he sealed a cooperation agreement with the Soviet Union that would lead to the docking of Apollo and Soyuz capsules in orbit in 1975 under his successor, Gerald R. Ford.
But the Apollo-Soyuz rendezvous, while momentous geopolitically, also effectively ended the space race. If astronauts and cosmonauts could meet in space, there hardly seemed an urgent need to spend huge amounts of money on an antiquated competition. At its peak, NASA commanded more than 4 percent of the federal budget; today it receives about half of 1 percent.
Presidential visions are undone by financial realities.
After a six-year hiatus, Americans returned to space in 1981 with the launch of the space shuttle Columbia only three months after Ronald Reagan took office.
Mr. Logsdon, the historian, who has written several books on presidents and the space program — most recently one on Reagan, published this year — said Bush came the closest any president has come to matching Kennedy’s vision and budget commitment, but the price tag caused sticker shock in Congress, and the idea went nowhere.
Instead, Mr. Clinton cut NASA’s budget and reimagined the program as a vehicle for international cooperation, converting Reagan’s envisioned space station into a joint venture with Russia as it emerged from the collapse of the Soviet Union. By the time Mr. Clinton left office, Americans and Russians were living together on the International Space Station, and have since.
George W. Bush found himself repeating history. Like Reagan, it fell to him to pick NASA back up after a shuttle disaster when the Columbia broke apart on re-entry in 2003, killing all seven on board. A year later, Mr. Bush set in motion plans to retire the aging shuttles in favor of a new set of powerful rockets and a crew capsule.
And like his father, Mr. Bush aimed to return to the moon by 2020, followed by a mission to Mars. But even though Congress signed on and financed the start of the program, impatient politicians gave up when progress was slower and costlier than predicted.
Trump sends mixed signals about his moon plan.
Barack Obama seemed less interested in space and killed Mr. Bush’s Constellation program to build the Ares rockets and Orion capsule even after it had begun test launches, calling instead for outsourcing manned spaceflight to commercial companies. As a result, since the shuttles were retired in 2011, Americans have had to rely on paid rides to the space station on Russian rockets.
Mr. Obama saw no need to return to the moon, proposing instead to land astronauts on an asteroid by 2025 and then send them to Mars in the 2030s. Congressional Republicans scoffed and rejected the idea.
Mr. Trump came to office determined to reverse course, re-establishing the National Space Council abolished by Mr. Clinton. The president has relished surrounding himself with Apollo-era heroes like Mr. Kranz, Mr. Aldrin and the moonwalker Harrison H. Schmitt.
But Mr. Trump seems more enchanted with his plan to create a military Space Force and sends mixed signals about his own exploration program. Just last month, he wrote on Twitter that “NASA should NOT be talking about going to the Moon,” but instead be focusing on Mars.
Even during Friday’s visit with the Apollo 11 crew, he began grilling Jim Bridenstine, his NASA administrator, on why the agency was not simply heading directly to Mars. “We need to learn how to live and work on another world,” Mr. Bridenstine explained.
Michael Foale, a retired astronaut who made extended stays on both the Russian space station Mir and the International Space Station, said the 2024 deadline “is highly unlikely to be achieved.” But he said he would “fully support” the idea of returning to the moon for a sustained stay, not just another one-off visit.
“The danger of a Kennedy-Trump-style ‘go to the moon’ — and then leave — is that it will disenchant another two generations of the world population with traveling to the moon even if it is successful, and much worse if an accident occurs,” Mr. Foale said.
