Dr. Joel Filártiga never forgot the advice that Alfredo Stroessner, the Paraguayan dictator, gave him one day.
Stroessner acquired all three, consolidating his grasp as a reviled and ruthless anti-Communist strongman who ruled Paraguay as Washington’s ally from 1954 until he was cashiered in a coup in 1989.
Dr. Filártiga, on the other hand, disregarded Stroessner’s counsel. He abandoned — some say betrayed — his family’s fortune. Rather than pursue pleasure, he instead found personal satisfaction — as the only doctor serving 30,000 poor peasants in what he called his Clinic of Hope in Ybycui, a town 60 miles southeast of Asunción, the capital.
And what power he procured came from his pen, as a human rights advocate who fought to avenge the torture of his teenage son during Stroessner’s rule. That campaign led to a signal victory in a United States court in 1980: a landmark ruling against foreign governments and their agents who commit torture.
Dr. Filártiga, who died on July 5 in Asunción at 86, local officials said, was jailed and tortured himself as a dissident in a lifelong struggle for justice that inspired the 1991 HBO film “One Man’s War,” starring Anthony Hopkins as the doctor.
That crusade was heightened in 1976 by the death of Dr. Filártiga’s 17-year-old son, Joelito. The authorities said the youth had been killed in a crime of passion by a police officer, who claimed that Joelito had been having an affair with the officer’s wife.
In fact, the young man, a high school student who worked as a driver for his father’s clinic, had been abducted and tortured to extract incriminating information about his father.
When she discovered two years later that Mr. Peña-Irala had fled to Brooklyn and had overstayed his visa, she notified the American authorities, who issued a deportation order. The next day, the Filártigas sued him for wrongful death — the civil equivalent of murder — in federal court in New York.
They were represented by Peter Weiss and his colleagues from the Center for Constitutional Rights, a New York-based legal team that specializes in civil rights and civil liberties cases.
Invoking the 1789 Alien Tort Claims Act, which was originally passed to protect against pirates and slave traders, Mr. Weiss and his fellow lawyers summoned as witnesses Jacobo Timerman, the former Argentine publisher whose account of his own jailing had generated indignation, and Robert E. White, a former United States ambassador to Paraguay and El Salvador.
Mr. Timerman testified on the psychological impact of torture and Mr. White on the state of civil liberties in Paraguay.
“It is fair to say that the Filártiga case changed history,” the Rev. Robert F. Drinan, a former Democratic congressman from Massachusetts, wrote in the foreword to Richard Allen White’s book “Breaking Silence: The Case That Changed the Face of Human Rights” (2004).
The Filártiga family’s claim to jurisdiction was initially rejected by the Federal District Court in Brooklyn. But in 1980, writing for the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan, the eminent jurist Judge Irving R. Kaufman overturned that decision in favor of the Filártigas.
Judge Kaufman’s decision expanded the principle of universal jurisdiction by ruling that foreign victims of torture that occurred abroad can sue for civil redress in the United States when the defendant — in this case Mr. Peña-Irala, then of Brooklyn — is within the dominion of American courts.
The Filártigas were later awarded more than $10 million in damages, but Mr. Peña-Irala had no assets to impound.
In 2013, the United States Supreme Court curtailed the breadth of Judge Kaufman’s ruling, limiting American jurisdiction to human rights abuses abroad that had a substantial connection to the United States.
Joel Holden Filártiga Ferreira was born on Aug. 15, 1932, in Ybytymi, about 60 miles southeast of Asunción. His father, Juan Bautista Filártiga, was a wealthy landowner.
Joel studied medicine at the National University of Asunción and at the Albert Einstein College of Medicine in the Bronx. He opened his clinic in Ybycui in 1959 and worked there with his wife, Nidia, and his children. He was typically paid in livestock and produce.
An accomplished artist, Dr. Filártiga helped finance the clinic by selling his brutalist ink-on-paper drawings of deformed soldiers, ragged children and mothers sheltering their children.
There was no information available on survivors.
