“Shake the table.” “Break things.” “Persist.” These are the metaphors of a new generation of political candidates.
Which is not to say it is entirely verboten — or that metaphorical ceilings are not actually being shattered. Kirsten Gillibrand tweeted the term this month as part of a pledge for gender parity in national security, while Marianne Williamson notes on her campaign website that the “proverbial glass ceiling” is one of the things holding women back.
Aside from the record-breaking number of female candidates for president — along with those serving in Congress — there are more female chief executives in the Fortune 500 than ever before (though, of course, that number is still just 33), and a recent study published in the journal American Psychologist found that a majority of Americans believe that women are just as competent as men — if not more.
“It’s a pretty dramatic shift,” said Alice Eagly, a social psychologist at Northwestern University who led the work, analyzing public perceptions over 70 years.
As a term, the “glass ceiling” dates to around 1978, when it was discussed by female workers at Hewlett-Packard and used onstage at a panel discussion about women’s aspirations by an employee of the New York Telephone Co. Each used it to describe the inability of white-collar women to rise beyond the mid-manager level in their jobs, and the often invisible barriers preventing that rise.
The phrase gained traction in the mid-1980s, when it appeared in an article in Adweek (quoting the outgoing editor of Working Woman magazine) and then a headline in The Wall Street Journal (“The Glass Ceiling: Why Women Can’t Seem to Break the Invisible Barrier That Blocks Them From the Top Jobs”). The New York Times ran an article in 1986 — the same year it proclaimed that, architecturally speaking, buildings made of see-through glass were “getting good reviews”— about the glass ceiling for female politicians, quoting Betty Friedan, co-founder of the National Organization for Women.
In the years following, the term continued to go mainstream — a kind of linguistic shorthand for a problem that could be difficult to pinpoint or describe. By the 1990s it had been used to describe the experiences of Navy women, female lawyers, women in banking, older women, black professionals (women and men), women who worked on the campaign of George Bush and the plight of female journalists — as explained by The Washington Post’s board chair at the time, Katharine Graham.
More recently, it has been uttered by the likes of Priyanka Chopra, the actor Brie Larson (who this year played Captain Marvel in a rare female-led superhero film) and Madeleine Albright, who wore a glass-ceiling brooch to the Democratic National Convention in 2016.
And then, of course, there was the fateful night at the Javits Center in Manhattan, under a literal glass ceiling where confetti shaped like glass shards was supposed to rain from above as Mrs. Clinton acknowledged victory.
The next morning, Mrs. Clinton gave a concession speech and Google Search results for “glass ceiling” peaked, higher even than their previous peak during the Democratic National Convention that summer. She noted somberly that while “we have still not shattered that highest and hardest glass ceiling,” someone would, eventually.
Which is not to say that the candidates are thinking about gender any less. To the contrary, the less they talk about it the more it might indicate they’re actually thinking about it more.
Or “motherhood penalty” to describe bias specifically against working mothers and “likability trap” to refer to the challenge female leaders face by having to prove they are tough and likable at once.
This time around, Ms. Klobuchar noted that the term itself isn’t just about winning the White House — it’s about running in the first place. The number of women in the race is “a testament to the progress we have made,” she said.
Sharon Attia contributed research.