ISTANBUL — Even before he began his first day at work as Istanbul’s new mayor, Ekrem Imamoglu was being talked about as the man who could challenge President Recep Tayyip Erdogan for the leadership of Turkey in four years’ time.
For the moment he is avoiding the question, and insists that he will concentrate for the next five years on serving Istanbul, a sprawling metropolis of 15 million inhabitants, a quarter of whom live below the poverty line.
There is no doubt that he presents a broader threat to the president. Mr. Imamoglu said he fully intended to use the enormous popular support that elected him by a surprisingly wide margin in a rerun on June 23 as a mandate to push back against Mr. Erdogan’s authoritarianism and bring democracy and fairness to all of Turkey.
Behind him is the Republican People’s Party, or C.H.P. The political party, Turkey’s oldest, was founded by the country’s first president, Mustafa Kemal Ataturk, and is the main challenger to Mr. Erdogan’s dominance of the political scene.
Since Mr. Erdogan swept to power with his Justice and Development Party, or A.K.P., in elections in 2002, the opposition has failed to dislodge him or prevent him from expanding his control over Turkey’s institutions, many of which are proud creations of the Ataturk legacy.
In fact, the opposition party had failed in so many elections that it seemed doomed to represent a dwindling portion of society, the secular elite who were increasingly moving abroad.
The party was struggling to combat the growing perception that Mr. Erdogan was unbeatable, said Kemal Kilicdaroglu, the party chairman since 2010. Its share of the vote had stalled at around 25 percent, while Mr. Erdogan’s Justice and Development Party was polling at 45 to 50 percent.
Mr. Kilicdaroglu, a 70-year-old former bureaucrat, has worked quietly to turn that around.
Nine years in opposition taught him that the Republican People’s Party had to not only renew itself, but also open up both to the intellectual and academic world and to ordinary people.
Instead of criticizing Mr. Erdogan, it needed to offer solutions for people’s problems, he said in an interview at his party headquarters in the capital, Ankara.
He turned to winning over Mr. Erdogan’s supporters — the majority of whom are working-class and the urban poor — targeting specific sectors such as subcontractors, and talking to people in their own neighborhoods.
Mr. Kilicdaroglu led a 250-mile march for justice from Ankara to Istanbul in the summer of 2017, drawing hundreds of thousands of participants in a cross-party effort to engage society.
The party also had to reckon with its undemocratic past. For the early decades of the republic it was the only party, and it carries political baggage of being almost commensurate with the state. It is still criticized for elitism and past discrimination against ethnic minorities and Islamists.
Mr. Kilicdaroglu, himself an Alevi, one of Turkey’s religious minorities, said he had encouraged party representatives to embrace self-criticism, especially when talking to A.K.P. supporters, and sought closer relations with smaller democratic parties.
The most important recent development has been the party’s success in getting mayors elected in six of Turkey’s most important cities, thanks to careful profiling of its candidates, and due in part to an alliance with other opposition parties.
Mr. Imamoglu is one of six mayors whom the party sees as its new generation of politicians who can reach out beyond its traditional base. Most do not come from the existing ranks of the party’s lawmakers.
The day after his inauguration, Mr. Imamoglu met with journalists from around the world to announce a strategy of openness and transparency that he said he hoped would draw millions more tourists and investment to Istanbul.
He said he would seek to work with Mr. Erdogan, and noted that the president had wished him success in a speech to his parliamentary group two days after the election.
But he also signaled that he would fight Mr. Erdogan if the president tried to hinder his administration of the city.
Immediately after the election, Mr. Erdogan’s government issued a circular to limit the powers of city mayors to assign managers of companies that serve the municipalities, Mr. Imamoglu said.
The circular shifted the power from the mayor’s office to the city council, where Mr. Erdogan’s party often holds a majority. The Ankara municipality had already filed a complaint against the circular and had it annulled, Mr. Imamoglu said.
He said he intended to use transparency and the force of public opinion to unblock bureaucratic resistance and overcome political obstacles thrown up by Mr. Erdogan. In his brief 17 days in office before the earlier election was annulled, he live-streamed council meetings for public viewing.
The election results showed that the Turkish people did not accept being dictated to, he said.
