The shelling stopped on Nov. 11, 1918, sending millions of American soldiers back to the United States to pick up where they had left off before joining or being drafted into the war effort. For one officer, the return meant facing a perfunctory public welcome and superficial support. “The quick abandonment of interest in our overseas men by Americans in general,” he observed three years after the Armistice, “is an indictment against us as a nation, not soon to be forgotten by the men in uniform from the other side.” The soldier, a former Army officer later identified as Herbert B. Hayden, anonymously published his observations in an essay for The Atlantic Monthly. The severe effects of combat-related injuries, like the ones Hayden described in his essay, drew more public attention during the 1920s, when the figure of the shellshocked veteran became part of larger debates over the government’s responsibility to care for its military forces.
The First World War saw more death than all of the Western world’s wars from 1790 to 1914 combined, and the American troops who arrived in France in 1917 were not insulated from the bloodshed. As one veteran remembered, fighting in the trenches was like “getting slaughtered as fast as sheep could go up a plank.” When the fighting ended the next year, any sense of idealism the American public felt when the United States entered the war was quickly replaced with weariness and a strong desire to move on. There was little consideration for the men who survived the war and what their long-term needs would be.
A series of posters — on display at the National World War I Museum and Memorial in Kansas City, Mo., until Sept. 15 — designed by the Army to show America’s discharged soldiers how they should behave once they returned to civilian life, provides evidence of the nation’s blindness to the toll modern war took on those who endured it. The Army didn’t want the flood of veterans returning home to become a disruptive presence or a financial burden on society.
All but one of the posters on display were designed by an Army captain named Gordon Grant, who worked as an illustrator before the war and was assigned to the Army General Staff’s Morale Section. Jonathan Casey, the exhibit’s curator, said these small posters were used as tools of social engineering. “The focus,” Casey explained, was “on staying clean for their families back home, and on taking the skills they developed or honed in the service and applying them in their own communities.” The posters were tacked on bulletin boards on Army bases and at demobilization sites around the country beginning in 1918.
Some of the posters seem to have been designed to shame returning veterans. They signaled that indulgence, indolence and sullenness were unacceptable attitudes for America’s veterans, without taking into consideration the potential underlying causes of such behavior. One poster depicts a veteran and a civilian standing in front of a cafe with a sign advertising “Beer & Ale.” Veterans may be out of the Army, the poster informs, but until they were out of uniform they shouldn’t act in ways that deviated from public perceptions of how they were supposed to behave.
The men depicted in the posters, with their bright smiles, angular chins and confident demeanors, are a stark contrast to some of the real men Hayden saw struggling to readjust to civilian life. The Army’s tone-deaf messages undoubtedly struck a nerve for people like Hayden who felt that coming home from war was akin to being catapulted into a different place and time, where nothing was easy. There was more to reintegration than simply having the right attitude.
Hayden wasn’t alone. A precise number is impossible to determine, but a study in 1921 estimated that 76,000 American veterans had been officially diagnosed with shell shock, a term first used by a British physician in 1915 to explain the effect that being near an exploding shell had on soldiers’ senses. By the end of the war, shell shock had entered the mainstream vocabulary, covering myriad symptoms including paralysis, blindness, tremors, nightmares and anxiety. Many service members who were said to be suffering shell shock probably had what we would now identify as post-traumatic stress disorder.
The shabby treatment of veterans by the government came more to the forefront of public opinion after the stock market collapsed in 1929. Many Americans came to see this negligence as similar to their own economic hardships, and public concern grew over the government’s abandonment of the men it had sent to war. By the time the United States was embroiled in another world war, policymakers agreed that returning veterans would need more than empty praise and shame-based messaging if they were to lead successful lives as civilians. The lessons learned serving veterans of the First World War were translated directly into support programs — including the Servicemen’s Readjustment Act of 1944, better known as the G.I. Bill — that benefited veterans of the Second World War. While the psychiatric effects of combat on service members wouldn’t be formally recognized until after the Vietnam War, when PTSD was included in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders in 1980, the end of World War II set a different standard for the treatment of former service members.
David Chrisinger is the director of the Harris Writing Program at the University of Chicago. His 2016 book, “See Me for Who I Am,” is a collection of essays written by student veterans. He is writing a book about the lessons he has learned from a career of helping others write about trauma.
