Angela Hock could face up to 20 years in prison if convicted of negligent child abuse resulting in the death of a baby.
A Nebraska woman who advertised herself as a midwife specializing in home births — but who prosecutors said did not have the proper certification — is facing a homicide charge after the troubled delivery of a newborn resulted in the baby’s death.
The midwife, Angela Hock, who turned herself in to the police on Tuesday for the June 17 death of the 2-day-old baby, appeared in Douglas County Court in Omaha on Friday, and was expected to be released later that day on a $25,000 bond.
Stuart J. Dornan, a lawyer for Ms. Hock, 36, said in an interview on Friday night that his client planned to plead not guilty to the charge of negligent child abuse resulting in the death of the baby. The felony charge, which both he and prosecutors said was rarely brought against midwives, carries a maximum penalty of 20 years in prison.
Despite not having a certification to practice as a midwife, prosecutors said, Ms. Hock had tried to perform a breech birth, when there is an elevated risk to a baby because its feet and buttocks, not head, are first to exit the birth canal.
The baby suffered swelling of the brain from a 10-minute loss of oxygen, and was unresponsive during the partial delivery, according to a criminal complaint, which said that paramedics had tried to unsuccessfully resuscitate the infant once she was delivered on June 15. The baby, named Vera by her parents, died two days later after her parents, Emily and Crayton Noe, removed her from life support.
Nebraska law requires nurse midwives to be certified by the state — and they must be under the supervision of a licensed medical practitioner in a health care facility or in an authorized setting. They are prohibited from delivering babies at home.
Brenda Beadle, the chief deputy county attorney, said she was not immediately prepared to comment on Friday night.
The baby’s parents declined to comment.
“I believe that we were created to birth without invention and that women possess the God-given wisdom and intuition to birth their babies free from regulation,” Ms. Hock wrote on her website.
Mr. Dornan said Ms. Hock had performed about 50 deliveries in the past without any episodes, as well as aiding in an additional 25 to 50 deliveries before that as a doula, a person who has no medical training but provides guidance during pregnancy and birth. He cited the case of a home birth attendant in upstate New York, who has been arrested twice on charges of illegally practicing as a midwife despite strong support from the local Mennonite community.
The couple paid about $4,000 for Ms. Hock’s services, according to Mr. Dornan, who said Ms. Hock served as a midwife when Ms. Noe gave birth to another child two years earlier.
“They wanted to have a birth in their bedroom,” Mr. Dornan said. “Didn’t want to go to the hospital."
Similar complications arose during the earlier pregnancy with a breech baby, he said, and Ms. Noe opted to have a C-section at the hospital after Ms Hock advised her of the risks. This time, he said, Ms. Hock once again warned Ms. Noe of the risks of a breech birth, but that she had opted to remain at home.
Mr. Dornan said Ms. Hock tried a maneuver to dislodge the baby, but was unsuccessful. She was accompanied by her 9-year-old daughter and a doula, who Mr. Dornan said called 911. When the emergency responders arrived at the home, Mr. Dornan said, they gave Ms. Hock a pair of scissors to try to help make a wider opening for the baby, which is considered to be a surgical procedure and is mentioned in the criminal complaint against his client.
“You’re looking at a choice of evils, if you will,” he said.