WIMBLEDON, England — Yes, Novak Djokovic stared down the deepest of holes in a championship match for the ages on Centre Court on Sunday, coming back after Roger Federer held two match points while serving for the title.
And, yes, Djokovic did indeed emerge victorious, 7-6 (5), 1-6, 7-6 (4), 4-6, 13-12 (3), in the longest Wimbledon singles final, and the first to end in a fifth-set tiebreaker with the score tied at 12-12.
But amid all the marveling about the tense moments and the miraculous shots, it shouldn’t be overlooked that the vast majority of Centre Court fans frothed for Federer from the first ball to the last. Crowds always respond to him with that kind of backing, but the nearly existential fervor is only growing as he continues to challenge for major titles at 37.
“Let’s go Roger!” and “C’mon, Roger, you can do it, Roger!” echoed so loudly and with such strident urgency that it is probably still ringing through the Wimbledon air.
When Federer at long last pushed the match to the brink, gaining a match point as he served at 8-7 in the fifth set, the crowd seemed ready to shake Centre Court to its studs.
But Djokovic simply would not back down. It was a mental feat as much as a physical one.
This match showed vividly what separates Djokovic from the pack. Once again he proved that, when it comes to guts and gumption, when it comes to pure ability to handle crunchtime, he is as unwavering as any player in tennis history.
Djokovic noted that he had come prepared. He’d visualized maintaining a state of inner steadiness, prepped himself to face the pro-Federer frenzy.
You could sense what Djokovic would face two hours before the final, when fans lined up underneath an overhead walkway that leads from a players’ lounge to Centre Court, hoping to catch even a glimpse of tennis royalty.
Never mind that actual royalty, the Duke and Duchess of Cambridge, were in attendance Sunday.
When the championship match began, it was beautiful to watch. The aggressive Federer and the counterpunching, never-give-an-inch Djokovic were reminiscent of Ali against Frazier. There were drop volleys that spun low at seemingly impossible angles. There were screaming groundstrokes that touched the lines.
There was Djokovic, still standing after being bludgeoned, particularly in a 6-1 second-set loss in which he looked out of sorts.
Djokovic had a smattering of supporters. Among them were his family, coaches and friends, who sat in one small corner of the court. There were others, though not many. A woman sat at another corner, with a printout of the flag of Serbia, Djokovic’s homeland, in her hand. She rose with it on occasion after he won points, chanting his name.
Since the start of the 2011 season, Djokovic has been the dominant force in men’s tennis, even in the context of the Big Three.
He holds a 21-10 record over Nadal in the past nine seasons, during which Djokovic has won 15 of his 16 Grand Slam titles. When last they played in a Grand Slam final, at the Australian Open in January, Djokovic painted a masterpiece, winning, 6-3, 6-2, 6-3, in just over two hours.
Including this match, his record against Federer in that span is just as imposing: 20-9.
Still, the records don’t count when it comes to public sentiment. Nadal and Federer are beloved. Djokovic, before this match and even after it, is simply respected, albeit deeply so.
His head-to-head record against Federer now includes three wins in the Wimbledon final, where Federer has claimed a record eight men’s titles. It also include three memorable wins at the United States Open, saving match points in the 2010 and 2011 semifinals and winning the 2015 final.
Unlike the atmosphere at that final in New York, where the fevered, pro-Federer audience verged on boorish, the crowd here did not seethe with nastiness.
The spectators were polite to him, granting him applause throughout, though it was often muted, restrained and grudging. When he made an error, there was applause. When Federer made an error, there were groans.
In the final set, Federer seemed weary. But with the crowd urging him on he edged ahead, breaking Djokovic with a crosscourt forehand pass.
History was about to be made. Another title was about to be won for by Federer, his ninth at Wimbledon, which would have tied Martina Navratilova’s record.
After the match, Djokovic revealed some of the secrets behind his will to win.

Federer went up 40-15 and had his two match points. On the second, he pressed forward. Djokovic took two solid strides to his right and rocketed a dipping forehand pass for a winner. Two points later, he evened the match.
They would play eight more games and then a winner-take-all tiebreaker. Djokovic won when Federer shanked a forehand that fell well out.
Often times, when he wins a big match, Djokovic makes a display of thanking the crowd by turning to each side of the court and blowing kisses and making gestures that show his love.
On Sunday, when the end finally came, there was none of that. He stood in the center of the court, looking out the crowd, stoic and satisfied. It was clear he’d beaten two opponents.