Fame still makes her anxious. But she loves doing the work that gets her there.
Liv Tyler has spent a lot of time thinking about where nature ends and nurture begins.
Most recently, it’s because Ms. Tyler’s American children have started speaking with an English accent. (She and her partner Dave Gardner, a sports agent, moved to London with their family in 2016.) Despite capitulating to many of the United Kingdom’s peculiar traditions, like using the word “boot” to describe what is clearly a “trunk,” Ms. Tyler said she still tried, at least initially, to maintain a sort of bilingual household.
Though Ms. Tyler says she “can’t remember the last time I went on an actual vacation,” she said she does occasionally get a few hours off to do nothing — at least until the plane lands.
A few years ago, Ms. Tyler, primarily a film actor — she’s best known for “Empire Records,” “Armageddon,” “Stealing Beauty” and the “Lord of the Rings” trilogy — surprised herself by connecting with prestige television, starting with a role on HBO’s “The Leftovers.” After reading the pilot, Ms. Tyler, then a 37-year-old brunette, decided she wanted the role of Meg, which was initially written as a “26-year-old redhead.” She got the part, sending her on a three-season character arc she says she could have never foreseen from the pilot. Most recently, she’s been acting on Hulu’s “Harlots,” the 18th-century period drama about British prostitutes now entering its third season, which shoots in the U.K. Among other things, the show has her thinking about how women relate to the world — and each other.
But Ms. Tyler also understands that assumptions are not always wrong, especially when nature is involved. After all, she was just nine years old when she went backstage at an Aerosmith concert and positively identified its frontman, Steven Tyler, as her biological father just by looking at him. Before that, she’d been under the impression that her father was a different rock musician, Todd Rundgren, who is listed on her birth certificate and who raised her as his own. But once she saw Mr. Tyler in the flesh, there was no denying that face, nor the wealth of mannerisms she’s since found she shares with her father and other members of the extended Tyler family.
In 2017, Ms. Tyler and her father underwent genetic testing for an episode of “Who Do You Think You Are,” revealing at least five generations of musicians and performers before them in their family tree. Ms. Tyler wasn’t surprised in the slightest.
Living in London has only served to highlight those similarities in her children, Milo, 14, Sailor, 4, and Lula, 2.
Whatever dominant trait is ultimately responsible for making someone a dynamic celebrity, Ms. Tyler certainly seems to have inherited it from her father. After getting into acting early on, by 1999 (when she was 22) she was at a place where she could wear a T-shirt to the Met Gala and wind up on the cover of a fashion magazine, which is exactly what happened when her friend, Stella McCartney — a designer and the daughter of Beatles rocker, Paul McCartney — called her up and invited her out for a night on the town.
Ms. McCartney showed up with two matching one-shoulder T-shirts with the text “Rock Royalty” bedazzled on the front that she had commissioned from Filth Mart on the Lower East Side.
“Everyone was in a beautiful gown, and very chic and expensive and dressed to the nines. And there we were, rocked up in these T-shirts from the Lower East Side,” Ms. Tyler said. “We got a lot of strange glares and snarly looks.” However, the next day they were on the cover of Women’s Wear Daily.
“And I thought, ‘Oh, okay. I guess that was kind of rock 'n' roll,’” she said.
Fast forward 20 years, and Ms. Tyler is still wearing designs by Ms. McCartney — and still bringing a touch of rock royalty to upscale events, most recently at the (actual) royal wedding of Princess Eugenie of York, which she attended alongside friends including Naomi Campbell, Kate Moss, Demi Moore and Cara Delevingne.
But despite her high-profile social scene, Ms. Tyler says the majority of her life in London can be divided between time spent with her family and time spent on set — and not always in that order.
Ms. Tyler says she used to leave the most important things for last, clearing the smaller items off her to-do list first, until a friend helped her reframe her priorities.
Ms. Tyler said she has been a “very curious person, a very observant person” since her childhood, which she spent alternately living with her mother, Bebe Buell, and her grandmother, the etiquette expert Dorothea Johnson, before discovering the truth of her parentage.
Ms. Tyler has tried to turn that relentless probing inward. To put it bluntly, fame — something she’s had her entire adult life — makes her anxious. But she loves doing the work that gets her there.
It’s a paradox that prompted her to start working this year on cognitive behavioral therapy, a technique that focuses on correcting harmful thought patterns. Ms. Tyler tends to look at her new projects not only as an artistic pursuit but as a way of examining herself and her life through a new lens.
