WASHINGTON — Since the start of the Trump administration, Britain has helped lead the quiet resistance to a president upending American foreign policy and straining the trans-Atlantic alliance.
That may change with Boris Johnson’s ascent to the post of prime minister of Britain on Wednesday. With his showmanship, his fondness for broad declarations and his transactional politics, Mr. Johnson, or “BoJo” as he is commonly known, is cut from Trumpian cloth.
Mr. Johnson fueled the Brexit movement in 2016; Mr. Trump embraced it months later. That, in turn, helped Mr. Johnson raise his profile, including his two-year stint as Britain’s foreign minister under Theresa May, the outgoing prime minister, whose leadership he helped undercut.
Both men are forces looking to shatter decades-old institutions that have bound together Western democracies. Mr. Trump has talked of withdrawing from the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, while Mr. Johnson aims to carry out Brexit, Britain’s divisive plan to leave the European Union — even if he has to do it without an agreement with Brussels.
The big question in Washington is whether Mr. Johnson will further change Britain’s course and more closely align the nation with its American cousin.
When Mr. Trump pulled out of the 2015 Iran nuclear deal, the British joined France and Germany in designing a plan to preserve the accord, aimed at helping compensate Tehran and offset American sanctions.
When Mr. Trump attacked NATO, London reassured its allies about the centrality of the alliance, even if the United States was distancing itself.
And when the Americans demanded that the United Kingdom and other European nations ban next-generation telecommunications gear provided by Huawei, the Chinese company, the British government hesitated, saying that the threat might not be great enough to risk trade with Chinese firms.
Mr. Trump is clearly hoping that his British doppelgänger will share his instincts on these issues. As it became clear that Ms. May would have to step down because of the Brexit impasse, Mr. Trump emerged as Mr. Johnson’s strongest advocate among world leaders.
Boris Johnson is now Britain’s prime minister and the new leader of the Conservative Party. The former foreign secretary is a hard-line supporter of Brexit.
A brash former mayor of London. “The chances of me being prime minister are about as good as finding Elvis on Mars.” Known to many for his political opportunism and for his staunch support of Brexit. “Let’s take back control of huge sums of money, take back control of immigration, take back control of our democracy. Let’s vote for freedom.” Boris Johnson is the embattled prime minister of Britain. So, who is he? Johnson worked for many years as a journalist in Britain. He was fired by The London Times for inventing a quote. It was in Brussels where Johnson made a name for himself writing for The Daily Telegraph. He wrote a string of articles ridiculing European Union bureaucracy that were often exaggerated or wrong. In 2008, he was elected mayor of London. “I declare Boris Johnson the next mayor of London.” He was re-elected four years later. It was London’s 2012 Summer Olympics that put him on the radar for many people in the rest of the world. But in Britain, he’s been associated with one thing in recent years: Brexit. “Now this is a once in a lifetime chance for us to take back control of this country.” When he was mayor of London, Johnson sometimes spoke favorably about the common market with the European Union. But perhaps recognizing a political opportunity, Johnson became one of Brexit’s most vocal supporters. “When you look at the E.U. now, it makes me think of some badly designed undergarment that has now become too tight in some places and dangerously loose in other places.” Johnson’s critics say his strong backing for leaving the European Union was purely tactical. And after a successful campaign, Theresa May named him foreign secretary in 2016. But Johnson said he thought May’s Brexit proposal was too conciliatory to Europe. Rather than supporting her plan, Johnson resigned in protest. “I will shortly leave the job.” When May announced she was stepping aside as prime minister, the stars aligned for Johnson to take over the job he always wanted. “I am standing to be leader of the Conservative Party.” Johnson has vowed that Britain will leave the European Union on Oct. 31, with or without a deal. “I want everybody to know there are no circumstances in which I will ask Brussels to delay. We’re leaving on the 31st of October, no ifs or buts.” But he’s facing some opposition to a no-deal Brexit, even within his own Conservative Party. About the only thing Parliament can agree on is that it doesn’t support a no-deal Brexit. So Johnson has taken to hardball tactics from suspending Parliament, to threatening to kick out rebel Tories for voting against the government. It’s a strategy that may be uniting disparate elements of the opposition and his own party against him. So what’s next? So far, lots of uncertainty. Parliament is considering whether to hold a general election. So Johnson finds himself in familiar territory: facing the same Brexit chaos that took down the two previous Conservative prime ministers.
That signaled what could be a wider shift in the dynamic between the United States and Britain as Mr. Johnson takes office.
Mr. Trump could ask Mr. Johnson to appoint Nigel Farage, the pro-Brexit right-wing politician, as Britain’s ambassador to Washington. On Tuesday morning, Mr. Farage was with Mr. Trump at an event in Washington.
Mr. Farage said Mr. Trump had told him that he and Mr. Johnson should push Brexit through the system.
“I want him to work with you, Nigel, to get the Brexit deal done,” Mr. Trump said, as recounted by Mr. Farage during an interview with a British radio show.
Another potential ambassador is Liam Fox, a pro-Brexit Scottish politician now serving as Britain’s secretary of state for trade and industry.
Mr. Trump is expected to continue dangling a potential free trade agreement with Britain to encourage Mr. Johnson to lead the nation in exiting the European Union by the deadline of Oct. 31. But given the complexities of British politics regarding Brexit, Mr. Johnson may find himself hard-pressed to meet Mr. Trump’s demands.
And given the all-consuming nature of figuring out Brexit, Mr. Johnson will have little time in the coming months to focus on other issues that might be central to the two nations.
Some European officials and analysts expect Mr. Johnson to act as more of a traditionalist than Mr. Trump. After all, he is a product of the British establishment — schooled at Eton and Oxford University, a member of Parliament, the former mayor of London. His stint as foreign minister from 2016 to 2018 resulted in some colorful quotes but no radical breaks from previous policies.
And for all his bluster and idiosyncrasies, Mr. Johnson does not rail against elite circles in the way that Mr. Trump does.
The test may come on Iran. Until now, the United States and Britain have been diametrically opposed over Mr. Trump’s “maximum pressure” campaign of harsh sanctions to force political change in Tehran.
Under Ms. May, and during Mr. Johnson’s tenure as foreign minister, Britain denounced Mr. Trump’s withdrawal from the 2015 nuclear agreement, insisting that it was working. With France and Germany, Britain sought to set up a barter system to get food, medicine and other goods to Iran, noting that they were not banned by the unilateral American sanctions.
European officials say Britain is still working in concert with the Europeans on Iran, despite the seizure last week of a British oil tanker by the Iranian military.
There is no sign yet that Mr. Johnson will abandon the European project to save the nuclear deal. And if Mr. Trump stumbles into a war with Iran, Mr. Johnson would almost certainly face great opposition from the British public if he tried to deploy its military to stand alongside the United States.
How Mr. Johnson will handle the fraught issue of China — on which Mr. Trump’s national security officials are in constant dialogue with their British counterparts — is also unclear.
Mr. Johnson and other British officials are fearful of wrecking London’s relationship with China, the world’s second-largest economy, and have refrained from using the same clash-of-ideologies language that Secretary of State Mike Pompeo and other Trump aides deploy when talking about their global rivalry with Beijing. And Mr. Johnson has made no proclamations yet about banning Huawei from Britain.
With the Brexit deadline looming, Mr. Johnson might find himself pushing off those decisions, which could create friction with the Trump administration.
