Five years after Mr. Garner’s dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a rallying cry, Attorney General William P. Barr ordered the case be dropped.
A contentious, yearslong debate inside the Justice Department over whether to bring federal civil rights charges against an officer in the death of Eric Garner ended on Tuesday after Attorney General William P. Barr ordered that the case be dropped.
The United States attorney in Brooklyn, Richard P. Donoghue, announced the decision one day before the fifth anniversary of Mr. Garner’s death at the hands of police officers on Staten Island.
The case had sharply divided federal officials and prompted national protests over excessive force by the police.

His dying words became a rallying cry for demonstrations that led to changes in policing practices across the United States.
Still, a Staten Island grand jury declined to indict Officer Daniel Pantaleo, who was captured on a video wrapping his arm around Mr. Garner’s neck. The federal civil rights investigation dragged on for five years amid internal disputes in the Justice Department, under both President Barack Obama and President Trump.
In the end, Mr. Barr made the call not to seek a civil rights indictment against Officer Pantaleo, just before a deadline for filing some charges expired.
His intervention settled the disagreement between prosecutors in the civil rights division, which has pushed for an indictment, and Brooklyn prosecutors, who never believed the department could win such a case.
Five years after Mr. Garner’s dying words, “I can’t breathe,” became a rallying cry, the Justice Department said it would not pursue charges against a New York City police officer.
Today: The Justice Department will not bring federal charges against the officer involved in the death of Eric Garner. Ashley Southall on why that decision was reached five years after “I can’t breathe” became a national rallying cry.
It’s Wednesday, July 17.
Ashley, tell me what happened on Tuesday.
Good morning. Thank you for coming today.
Before I continue, let me say, as clearly and unequivocally as I can, that Mr. Garner’s death was a tragedy. For anyone to die under circumstances like these is a tremendous loss.
But these unassailable facts are separate and distinct from whether a federal crime has been committed. And the evidence here does not support charging police officer Daniel Pantaleo or any other officer with a federal criminal civil rights violation.
— that they would not bring charges against any of the officers involved in Eric Garner’s death on July 17, 2014.
We know and understand that some will be disappointed by this decision, but it is the conclusion that is compelled by the evidence and the law.
He’s making this announcement one day before the fifth anniversary of Eric Garner’s death, which is important, because for the charge that they thought was appropriate in this case, they only had five years to decide whether to bring it.
So this is basically the last possible moment to bring this charge.
Exactly. And at the end of the day, the prevailing consensus was that they could not do that in this case.
Consequently, the investigation into this incident has been closed.
And remind us of the details of this case, of what happened to Eric Garner, where this case begins.
The case starts on July 17, 2014 on a hot summer day in Staten Island. The police say that a man by the name of Eric Garner has died during an attempt to arrest him. There’s no mention of any kind of use of force, no mention of a chokehold. And then the next morning, the police and the public wake up to this video.
Every time you see me, you want to mess with me. I’m tired of it. This stops today.
This guy right here is forcibly trying to lock somebody up for breaking up a fight.
It shows two officers, Justin Damico and Daniel Pantaleo, approach Eric Garner on a street in Tompkinsville. And they accuse him of selling cigarettes. And he says, no, man, I’m not selling anything. I’m just minding my business. Leave me alone.
Everybody standing here. They’ll tell you I didn’t do nothing. I did not sell nothing.
This goes on for about 10 minutes.
You want to harass me? You want to stop me?
Officer Damico moves in to try to handcuff Eric Garner, and he flails his hands away. Then you have Officer Pantaleo attempt a takedown. They fall back into plate glass.
I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe.
I can’t breathe, I can’t breathe, I can’t breathe. He ultimately says it 11 times.
Once again, police beating up on people.
E.M.S. eventually arrives. They don’t have any oxygen.
Look, now, man, they gave this man a seizure.
No, move out the way. No.
It’s my brother. We live here.
And he was later pronounced dead at the hospital.
What happens in the aftermath of this video being released?
So pretty much right away, there are calls for Officer Pantaleo to be fired and for him and other officers to be criminally charged, both for Eric Garner’s death, but also for the omissions of the use of force from official reports.
Because until this video is released, the officers involved in the encounter, they haven’t mentioned any of the tactics that they’ve used.
Correct. And then three things happen simultaneously. The police Internal Affairs Bureau begins looking into the incident to see if any protocols were violated. At the same time, the Staten Island district attorney is looking at whether a crime was committed and then begins to present evidence to a grand jury. And at the same time, the feds are also looking in on these investigations, trying to see what evidence there is. But at that moment, they’re not yet investigating, because there’s a local process that has to play out.
And when you say the feds, you mean the Department of Justice.
So my sense is that this is all moving as would be expected in a case like this. But what’s different is that a month after this happens, Michael Brown is shot in Ferguson and the issue of how police treat unarmed black Americans becomes a major national issue.
Correct. But it’s an issue that’s been bubbling up for some time. If you will reverse back to 2012, when Ramarley Graham was shot and killed by a New York City police officer, he was unarmed.
Officer Richard Haste was indicted for manslaughter, but a judge reluctantly threw out the indictment in May on procedural grounds.
Then, a few weeks later, you have Trayvon Martin, who was killed by a vigilante in Florida.
We have just learned that the jury has determined that Zimmerman is not guilty of any crime.
And then you have Eric Garner in July 2014, followed by Michael Brown that August.
The conclusion? That police officer Darren Wilson was not guilty of a crime when he shot Michael Brown to death on August 9.
And then you have Akai Gurley and Tamir Rice within days of each other.
A grand jury decided not to indict Timothy Loehmann, who shot and killed 12-year-old Tamir Rice.
So people are seeing this pattern of unarmed black men and boys, and even some women, being killed by the police and no one being held responsible or accountable for their deaths. And that is the backdrop for the decision by the grand jury in Staten Island in December 2014 that there isn’t enough evidence to prove that Officer Pantaleo committed a crime.
So like the D.O.J. this week, the investigation by the Staten Island district attorney all the way back in 2014 finds that there’s not sufficient evidence.
Yes. And to the public, that’s infuriating. Because keep in mind that in the months between Eric Garner’s death in July and the grand jury’s decision in December, the public has learned that the medical examiner, who is a pathologist, deemed this a homicide. And they also learned that, for at least 20 years, chokeholds have been explicitly banned by the police department. And what people saw on that video was an officer using a banned chokehold and Mr. Garner dying.
(CHANTING) I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe. I can’t breathe.
And what do we know about how this grand jury decided not to press charges in what seemed to so many, from the video, like a clear-cut case?
And that testimony, it sounds like, becomes important, the question of intent.
Yes, because the standard of proof in a criminal case is that the prosecutor needs to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the officer willfully acted in violation of the law, that it was an officer’s intent and his will to violate the law. And for that grand jury, the decision not to press charges indicates that the evidence didn’t meet that standard.
And what about the fact that the use of a chokehold had been banned by police, regardless of intent? Didn’t he use an illegal practice? And wasn’t that weighed by the grand jury?
What Officer Pantaleo told the Internal Affairs Bureau, and later the grand jury, was that he wasn’t intending to use a chokehold. He said he was trying to use a seat-belt technique, which is a tactic approved by the N.Y.P.D. and taught at the Police Academy.
It’s another kind of restraint?
Yes. And what his lawyers have also pointed out is that, whether it was a seat belt or a chokehold, once they’re on the ground and Mr. Garner begins to grunt and say, “I can’t breathe,” he releases him.
So after the district attorney decides not to press charges, what happens to the case of Eric Garner?
So you’ll remember that this whole time, the Department of Justice has been watching the investigation play out. And once the local investigation is done, it’s now in their territory.
Good evening. I want to provide an update regarding the case involving Eric Garner.
And when the Department of Justice steps in, Ashley, what are they looking at? Is it a new question or are they basically investigating the same things as the city?
So what the grand jury in Staten Island was looking at was whether Officer Pantaleo committed a crime.
Now that the local investigation has concluded, I’m here to announce that the Justice Department will proceed with a federal civil rights investigation into Mr. Garner’s death.
Here, the federal government is looking at whether his crime was violating Eric Garner’s civil rights.
This afternoon, I spoke with the widow of Eric Garner to inform her and her family of our decision to investigate potential federal civil rights violations.
And in this case, there were two key things that they wanted to establish, or that they’d felt they needed to establish. One, that the force Officer Pantaleo used to subdue Mr. Garner was objectively unreasonable, that a police officer acting in those circumstances could have recognized what he did as just too much. And then the second thing that they wanted to establish was that his conduct was a willful violation of the law, that he knew the law and that he acted in a way that disregarded it.
And by those measures, did the Department of Justice feel that it had a strong case to bring against this officer?
So this is the question that they were asking themselves over the more than four years that they were investigating this incident. And there was a lot of disagreement between mostly civil rights prosecutors in Washington, who thought that they should bring charges and thought that there was enough evidence there, and then the prosecutors in Brooklyn, who were going to be the ones who had to prosecute the case, who thought that it was not winnable.
And what’s your understanding of why those two sides disagreed? What was Washington thinking? And what was New York thinking?
From what we know, it really came down to the willfulness. On the video, some prosecutors thought that the fact that Officer Pantaleo kept his arm around Eric Garner’s neck even after they were on the ground showed that he willfully disregarded the law. In Brooklyn, they were not so sure. And part of that, you can imagine, is from Officer Pantaleo’s testimony that his intent was not to hurt him. His intent was to arrest him.
So all the while that prosecutors are conducting their investigation and dealing with these questions about whether they have a case and whether they can win it, the White House changes hands from President Obama to President Trump. We go through a series of attorneys general — Eric Holder, Loretta Lynch, Jeff Sessions, who are all overseeing this case from Washington. And then you end up with Bill Barr, our current attorney general.
Who ultimately makes the decision himself.
In order for a federal criminal civil rights charge to be brought, the government must prove beyond a reasonable doubt that an officer willfully used more force than he reasonably could have believed was necessary under the circumstances. And the law recognizes that police are often forced to make split-second judgments in circumstances that are tense, uncertain and rapidly evolving.
So one of the main questions of this case is whether or not Officer Pantaleo actually used a chokehold.
As Mr. Garner and Officer Pantaleo struggled, Officer Pantaleo held onto Mr. Garner and both men fell backward. In the process, Officer Pantaleo’s body slammed against a store window, causing the window to buckle.
And in this explanation, Mr. Donoghue said, yes, he did.
It appears that in response to that collision and to maintain a hold on Mr. Garner, Officer Pantaleo wrapped his left arm around Mr. Garner’s neck, resulting in what was, in effect, a chokehold.
But here’s how prosecutors dealt with that question.
Like many of you, I have watched that video many times. And each time I’ve watched it, I’m left with the same reaction.
That the death of Eric Garner was a tragedy.
— is not to let our emotions dictate our decisions. Our job is to review the evidence gathered during the investigation, like the video, to assess whether we can prove that a federal crime was committed. At the end of the day, however, the video and the other evidence gathered in the investigation does not establish beyond a reasonable doubt that Officer Pantaleo acted willfully in violation of federal law.
What you see on video is very clearly an escalation by the officers to make this arrest for this very minor offense. And it ends with Mr. Garner dying. And so the net effect is that Mr. Garner’s punishment for allegedly selling cigarettes that day is death. That, in many people’s eyes, is too much. But in the eyes of the law, the prosecutors here, based not just on the video, but on the testimony of witnesses and the testimony of the officers, thought there just wasn’t enough.
So Ashley, it’s been five years to the day that Eric Garner died during this interaction with the N.Y.P.D. And it now seems like prosecutors seem to have closed the book on this case. What, if anything, happens now? Is this case over?
He remains on the force.
Yes. There’s this process underway in the N.Y.P.D. that will ultimately end with the police commissioner, James O’Neill, deciding whether or not he gets to stay on the force as a police officer or if he has to leave. And he could allow him to resign. He could fire him. Or he could just dock him some vacation days. That decision could take weeks, it could take months, or it could happen tomorrow. We don’t know. But it’s not over for him.
So what happens to him may end up being the accountability. It’s not going to happen in a courtroom, it seems. It’s not going to happen at the federal court level or the district attorney level, but it might happen inside the N.Y.P.D.
The Garner family has demanded for the last five years that Officer Pantaleo be fired. They have also asked for the other officers who were involved in his death and those who filed official reports that didn’t mention the chokehold, that didn’t mention any uses of force, should also be fired and held accountable.
I’m going to stand outside and I’m going to scream it. Pantaleo needs to be fired! He needs to be fired! Don’t apologize to me. Fire the officer. Don’t give me your condolences. I heard that five years ago. We want justice, and we want it today.
If that’s what the family wants, they have quite the mountain to climb. Officer Pantaleo is still on the force. Half of the officers’ names the family doesn’t know, because the city has withheld them. But the message from the family of Eric Garner today was loud and clear.
This is what we have to live every day. And you know what? We’re not going to take this sitting down.
This is not going down like this, because if it was one of their loved ones, it would have never went this far. So my son’s death is not going in vain. We’re going to fight this to the last straw if I’m the only one out on the street. And I’ve got all of these supporters behind me.
Ashley, thank you very much.
But you’ve stopped short of calling these comments racist.
Well, the president’s not a racist. The president’s not a racist.
On Tuesday, top Republicans in Congress rallied to the defense of President Trump, denying that his tweet calling on four Democratic congresswomen to return to the countries from which they came were bigoted and racist.
Mr. Leader, were the president’s tweets that said “go back” racist? Yes or no?
Every single member of this institution, Democratic and Republican, should join us in condemning the president’s racist tweets.
Hours later, on the House floor, speaker Nancy Pelosi introduced a resolution condemning Trump’s attacks on Representatives Ayanna Pressley, Rashida Tlaib, Ilhan Omar and Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez.
As Pelosi spoke, House Republicans demanded that she retract her description of the president’s comments as racist.
I was just going to give the gentle speaker of the House if she would like to rephrase that comment.
I have cleared my remarks with the parliamentarian before I read them.
I take it — can I ask her words be taken down? I make a point of order — the gentlewoman’s words are unparliamentary and ready to be taken down.
House Democrats went on to pass the resolution with the support of just four House Republicans.
On Tuesday morning, Mr. Donoghue called Mr. Garner’s death a tragedy, but said “the evidence does not support charging Police Officer Pantaleo with a federal civil rights violation.” He went over the arrest step by step, maintaining the government could not prove Officer Pantaleo willfully used excessive force to violate Mr. Garner’s rights.
The Garner family and its supporters immediately condemned Mr. Barr’s decision, saying the Justice Department had failed them.
Mr. Garner’s mother, Gwen Carr, shifted the pressure to Mayor Bill de Blasio of New York, calling on the city to fire Officer Pantaleo and vowing to fight to hold the officers involved in the arrest accountable.
United States Attorney Richard P. Donoghue explained the Department of Justice’s decision not to file federal charges against a New York City police officer in the death of Eric Garner.
Let me say as clearly and unequivocally as I can, that Mr. Garner’s death was a tragedy. For anyone to die under circumstances like these is a tremendous loss. For the family to suffer as this family has for too long, has only compounded the loss. But these unassailable facts are separate and distinct from whether a federal crime has been committed. And the evidence here does not support charging Police Officer Daniel Pantaleo — or any other officer — with a federal criminal civil rights violation.
At a later rally on the steps of City Hall, a parade of family members, community leaders, local politicians and civil rights lawyers vented their fury at Mr. Barr and other officials.
Stuart London, a lawyer for Officer Pantaleo, said that his client was “gratified” to hear of the Justice Department decision.
Patrick J. Lynch, the president of the Police Benevolent Association, said Officer Pantaleo had been unfairly singled out for blame and was carrying out a superior’s orders.
“Scapegoating a good and honorable officer, who was doing his job in the manner he was taught, will not heal the wounds this case has caused for our entire city,” Mr. Lynch said.
From the start, the Pantaleo investigation sharply divided the Justice Department.
Eric H. Holder Jr., Mr. Obama’s attorney general at the time of Mr. Garner’s death, said that evidence strongly suggested the federal government should bring charges against Officer Pantaleo, even though it was notoriously hard to prosecute police officers for deaths in custody.
The last time the federal government brought a deadly force case against a New York police officer was in 1998, when Officer Francis X. Livoti stood trial on — and was eventually convicted of — civil rights charges in the choking death of a Bronx man named Anthony Baez.
But the prosecutors in the United States attorney’s office in Brooklyn, led by Loretta E. Lynch, did not believe they could win in court and balked at bringing charges.
Once Ms. Lynch succeeded Mr. Holder in April 2015, however, Vanita Gupta, the head of the civil rights division, and her lawyers convinced Ms. Lynch that the officers had very likely violated Mr. Garner’s civil rights.
The two sides disagreed over whether the widely published video of Mr. Garner’s arrest proved that Officer Pantaleo had acted wrongfully. Prosecutors in Washington D.C. accused their colleagues in Brooklyn of mishandling the investigation.
As the Russia investigation engulfed the Department and Mr. Sessions was fired, the case languished until Mr. Barr took it up.
To the bitter end, prosecutors on both sides of the debate lobbied Mr. Barr in a series of briefings; and Mr. Barr reviewed the video multiple times, officials said.
Mr. Barr, in the end, sided with prosecutors in New York.
But it is ultimately up to Commissioner James P. O’Neill, the final arbiter of police discipline, to decide whether to fire Officer Pantaleo or punish him in some other way.
However, the commissioner will not make a formal decision until the police administrative judge who oversaw a disciplinary trial that ended in June renders her verdict, a spokesman for the department, Philip T. Walzak, said in a statement.
Officer Pantaleo, 34, has been on desk duty without a shield or a gun since Mr. Garner died, a status that has allowed him to accrue pay and pension benefits.
Mr. Garner, who was 43, died on a Staten Island sidewalk on July 17, 2014, after Officer Pantaleo wrapped an arm around his neck from behind and took him to the ground. Other officers put their weight on him, compressing his chest against the pavement.
The officers had been ordered to arrest him for selling untaxed cigarettes, and he had resisted. A medical examiner testified at the disciplinary hearing that the pressure on Mr. Garner’s neck and chest set in motion a fatal asthma attack.
Federal prosecutors did a “rigorous analysis” of the event, but in the end they did not believe they had enough evidence to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that Officer Pantaleo had committed a crime, a senior Justice Department official said on Tuesday, speaking on the condition of anonymity because he had not been authorized to speak on the record.
To prove criminal conduct, the official said, the government had to convince a jury that in the middle of a dynamic arrest Officer Pantaleo made a clear decision to apply a chokehold, which the Police Department had banned more than two decades ago. It was a burden that prosecutors did not believe they could meet, the official said.
None of the New York officers involved in Mr. Garner’s death have been charged with a crime or disciplined by the Police Department. That fact has enraged the Garner family and various advocacy groups devoted to holding the police accountable for abuses of power.
The state grand jury declined to bring charges against Officer Pantaleo in December 2014, after he testified in his own defense that he did not put Mr. Garner into a chokehold, and that he had feared he would be pushed through a storefront window during the struggle.
The Justice Department said Tuesday that it had weighed four elements in deciding whether to charge Officer Pantaleo, including whether he used unreasonable force, whether he willfully violated the law, whether he acted in his official capacity as a law enforcement professional and whether the other person was injured.
Mr. Donoghue said prosecutors did not believe they could prove he had intentionally used unreasonable force. Even if they could prove the officer had used force that was “objectively unreasonable,” the government would still have to show the officer did so “willfully,” a very high level of intent.
The Brooklyn prosecutors who studied the video of the encounter concluded that Officer Pantaleo did not initially intend to apply a chokehold, and that he eventually did so for seven seconds after the two men crashed to the ground, Mr. Donoghue said.
Reporting was contributed by Ashley Southall, William K. Rashbaum, John Surico and Derek Norman.