Politics|Trump Disavows ‘Send Her Back’ Chant After Pressure From G.O.P.
Trump Disavows ‘Send Her Back’ Chant After Pressure From G.O.P.
Trump Says He Tried to Stop ‘Send Her Back’ Chant. Here’s What the Video Shows.
President Trump said he disagreed with his supporters chanting “send her back” after he railed against a Somali-born congresswoman, Ilhan Omar, at a rally Wednesday in North Carolina. Video contradicts his claim.
When your supporters last night were chanting, “Send her back,” Why didn’t you stop them — Why didn’t you ask them to stop saying that? Well, No. 1, I think I did. I started speaking very quickly. It really was a loud — I disagree with it by the way — but it was quite a chant. And I felt a little bit badly about it. But I will say this. I did. And I started speaking very quickly. But it started out rather fast as you probably noticed. And obviously, and importantly, Omar has a history of launching vicious anti-Semitic screeds. Crowd: “Send her back!” And she talked about the evil Israel and “it’s all about the Benjamins.” Not a good thing to say.
WASHINGTON — Nervous Republicans, from senior members of Congress to his own daughter Ivanka, urged President Trump on Thursday to repudiate the “send her back” chant directed at a Somali-born congresswoman during his speech the night before at a rally in North Carolina, amid widespread fears that the rally had veered into territory that could hurt their party in 2020.
In response, Mr. Trump disavowed the behavior of his own supporters in comments to reporters at the White House and claimed that he had tried to contain it, an assertion clearly contradicted by video of the event.
Mr. Trump said he was “not happy” with the chant directed at Representative Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, a freshman Democrat who is Muslim. At the rally Wednesday evening, he had been in the middle of denouncing her as an anti-American leftist who has spoken in “vicious, anti-Semitic screeds” when the chant was taken up by the crowd.
Mr. Trump’s cleanup attempt reflected the misgivings of political allies who have warned him privately that however much his hard-core supporters in the arena might have enjoyed the moment, the president was playing with political fire, according to people briefed on the conversations.
Among them were House Republican leaders, who pleaded with Vice President Mike Pence to distance the party from the message embraced by the crowd in Greenville, N.C. Mr. Pence conveyed that directly to Mr. Trump, according to people familiar with the exchange.
“That does not need to be our campaign call, like we did the ‘lock her up’ last time,” said Representative Mark Walker, Republican of North Carolina, a top official in the party’s messaging arm, referring to the chant that routinely broke out whenever Mr. Trump mentioned Hillary Clinton during the 2016 campaign. Midway through that race, Mr. Trump told reporters he did not approve of that chant, but he never intervened.
On Sunday, the president tweeted about four congresswomen in messages denounced as racist. 
