Jacqueline Novak is poised for a breakout with “Get on Your Knees,” a new one-woman show Off Broadway.
Ms. Novak paused, pondering whether to finish her thought, deciding against it, and moving on, before I returned to the subject with a follow-up question: Do you think oral sex is more intimate than intercourse?
“If you’re doing it right,” she said, with a screwball snap.
Presenting an elevated take on lewd subject matter is characteristic of Ms. Novak’s charmingly eccentric comedy. She regularly veers between confidence and vulnerability, self-conscious pretension and goofy physicality. In her debut on “The Tonight Show,” she improvised a 360-degree twirl in the middle of a stand-up set.
Ms. Novak, who recently moved to Los Angeles after many years as a distinctively funny voice in this city’s comedy scene, is difficult to pigeonhole, and her new show can be tricky to market. Parts are too obscene to describe in this newspaper, and yet its ambitions might be too highbrow for certain club comedy fans.
In part to illustrate the challenge, Ms. Novak read me the email her director, the comic John Early, wrote to The New York Times photographer in an attempt to avoid an image that leans too hard on a cheap sex joke.
Ms. Novak is not a provocateur, but she delights in attention-getting comparisons, counterintuitive arguments and unexpected turns of phrase. I’ve seen thousands of comics tell jokes about the penis, but she’s the first to call it “the nis,” and to argue, with rigor, for its peculiar femininity.
After filling out an exercise in “The Artist’s Way” about what she would do if she knew she wouldn’t fail, Ms. Novak joined an improv troupe at Georgetown University that also included the now-famous comics John Mulaney and Nick Kroll. (Mike Birbiglia, a member a year before, was an early supporter of hers and is a producer of the Cherry Lane show). Once she moved to New York, she had more trouble than her peers getting traction, struggling to break into clubs.
About eight years ago, at a low moment, she moved back in with her parents in upstate New York and started writing a book about depression, “How to Weep in Public,” published in 2016. Once she returned to the city, she met comedians, like Kate Berlant and Mr. Early, who worked in alternative spaces.
Ms. Novak said she wants to appeal to club and alt audiences, but mounting her new show — which tells a personal story, with an arc — in a theater represents a growing ambition that she hopes leads to a comedy special.
The new act allows for more room to wander, to play with ideas, to move onstage. “Birbiglia once said to me: Some comedians struggle to find ways to be vulnerable, but the thing that’s harder for you is to the let the ham in,” she said, citing this as critical advice, a turning point.
