Mr. Shkreli had appealed his 2017 convictions on securities fraud and conspiracy related to investments in two hedge funds that he founded. The appeal was argued on June 28, and the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit in Manhattan took just three weeks to affirm his convictions — decision that indicated the judges had little trouble rejecting Mr. Shkreli’s appeal.
The key issue was whether Federal District Judge Kiyo A. Matsumoto, who presided over the original trial in Brooklyn, gave the jury faulty instructions that led to confusion about what the government had to prove about losses by investors to obtain a conviction.
Mr. Shkreli was originally indicted on eight counts, and the jury acquitted him of the charges of wire fraud and conspiracy to commit wire fraud.
His defense at trial was that he was acting in good faith, and none of the investors lost money. In fact, most made money. The government argued that he misled investors about the amount of money in the two funds and whether there were an outside auditor and administrator. Mr. Shkreli also misstated his record with a prior hedge fund that he managed, the government said.
 That there was “no ultimate harm” to the investors was not a defense to a securities fraud charge, Judge Matsumoto told the jury. “No amount of honest belief on the part of a defendant that the scheme ultimately will make a profit for the investors will excuse fraudulent actions or false representations by him,” she said.
On appeal, Mr. Shkreli’s lawyer argued that point by telling the jury that “no ultimate harm” was insufficient to show good faith for the securities fraud charges and caused confusion about what was needed to convict. Indeed, after deliberations began, the jury asked the judge to “expand or elaborate your definition of fraudulent intent.” The defense argued that the jurors should have been told his “good faith and reliance on counsel” were possible defenses for Mr. Shkreli and that causing losses for investors was important for establishing intent.
But there is an important distinction between the wire fraud charges, on which the jury found Mr. Shkreli not guilty, and the securities fraud charges on which he was convicted. The wire fraud statute requires proving that the defendant used a fraudulent scheme to obtain money or property from the victims.
In United States v. Litvak, the Second Circuit last year pointed out that “unlike common law fraud or a civil action for damages where an investor seeks compensatory damages, proof of harm is not necessary in a criminal prosecution under Section 10(b), so long as materiality, intent to defraud, and a connection to a securities transaction are shown.” In United States v. Leonard, a 2008 Second Circuit decision, the appeals court upheld giving a “no ultimate harm” instruction because the defendants “intended to deprive investors of the ‘full information’ they needed to ‘make refined, discretionary judgments.’” By doing so, the court said the defendants “intended to harm the investors.” In other words, harm stems from the false statements to induce investments, not whether anyone lost money.
Thus, the court of appeals distinguished wire fraud and securities fraud and rejected the argument that jurors should have been told that investor losses were important to find securities fraud. The Second Circuit stated that “exclusion of additional language describing an element not required for the charged crime” could not have been prejudicial to Mr. Shkreli.
The appeals court also upheld the district court’s order that Mr. Shkreli forfeit $6.4 million as ill-gotten gains from the securities fraud. The judges rejected his argument that the investors did not lose any money and found that “forfeiture is gain based, not based on the losses (or gains) to the victims.” Thus, the finding that he misappropriated money from the hedge funds for his own use supported the forfeiture order.
A criminal asset forfeiture conviction means that Mr. Shkreli will have to turn over any funds obtained from the victims. In addition, if there is not enough money derived from the fraud to satisfy the full $6.4 million, then prosecutors can seek “substitute assets,” or any other money and property owned by Mr. Shkreli, to satisfy the forfeiture order.
Is there a chance the Supreme Court will review Mr. Shkreli’s securities fraud convictions? The Second Circuit’s decision does not contain much that is novel, and there is no apparent split in the lower appeals courts over whether investors must lose money to prove securities fraud. With few intriguing legal issues, the likelihood of the court accepting his appeal appears to be low.