Mr. Trump’s history of remaining glued to television news — especially when the coverage is about him — suggests that he is certain to be tuned in as Democrats on Capitol Hill use Mr. Mueller’s appearance to amplify the damning report about the president and the people in his orbit.
But ahead of the congressional hearings, Mr. Trump and his aides sought to dismiss them as nothing more than a desperate attempt to elicit from Mr. Mueller something that could justify impeachment proceedings.
The president’s tone was echoed by his aides. Kellyanne Conway, his counselor, called the hearings “a do-over of the do-over of the do-over” and said they were an insult to taxpayers and American democracy.
Mr. Mueller is scheduled to testify before two congressional committees starting at 8:30 a.m. Wednesday. Cable and broadcast television networks have said they intend to air the hearings live.
Democrats have said they believe Mr. Mueller’s testimony will bring to life the detailed, 448-page report, which established no criminal conspiracy between the Trump campaign and the Russians, but did cite evidence of what Democrats say is clearly obstruction of justice.
The report declined to reach a conclusion about whether Mr. Trump was guilty of obstruction, citing a Justice Department policy that prevents indicting a sitting president. Democrats hope to press Mr. Mueller to state what he believes about Mr. Trump’s culpability.
But even as the president railed against Mr. Mueller online and in person, he also sought to continue his criticism of four Democratic congresswomen of color after a week in which his tweets about them dominated news coverage.
If the president wanted to move on from that controversy, it was not apparent on Monday morning as he tweeted again about the women: Representatives Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York, Ilhan Omar of Minnesota, Rashida Tlaib of Michigan and Ayanna S. Pressley of Massachusetts.
That tweet came days after the Democrat-controlled House approved a resolution that condemned as racist the language the president used in his earlier criticism of them. And it came just after Mr. Trump left the White House for a brief trip to the Supreme Court, where the body of former Justice John Paul Stevens was lying in repose.
The president and the first lady, Melania Trump, paid their respects to Justice Stevens moments later.
During remarks to reporters several hours later in the Oval Office, while sitting next to Prime Minister Imran Khan of Pakistan, he added to his criticism.
At one point, Mr. Trump seemed to mix together his frustrations with the Mueller testimony and his criticism of the four lawmakers by lashing out at the House for taking a vote to impeach him.
The vote, which failed 332 to 95, called for the president’s removal from office because of his tweets aimed at the women. But the president seemed to see it as vindication in the Russia case.
