Playwrights and comedians try to make sense of human brutality, and the public’s feverish interest in real-life murder mysteries.
The popularity of true crime has increased substantially in the past five years, spurred by podcasts such as “Serial” and documentaries like Netflix’s “Making a Murderer.” It’s no wonder that a true crime wave is hitting Edinburgh Festival Fringe this August.
The festival, starting Aug. 2 and running for over three weeks, has at least 15 shows, ranging from comedies to darker material. “Bible John” looks at the unsolved case of three women believe to have been murdered by a serial killer in Glasgow in the late 1960s, and “The Incident Room” examines the police investigation into the Yorkshire Ripper, Peter Sutcliffe, who was convicted of killing 13 women in the late 1970s and early 1980s.
At the Edinburgh International Festival, which coincides with the fringe festival, the Swiss director Milo Rau will stage “La Reprise,” which explores the murder of Ihsane Jarfi, a young gay man, in Liège, Belgium, in 2012.
As for the lighter fare, the comedians Anna Drezen, Matt Price and Rhys James will tackle true crime in their stand-up sets. In addition, true crime stars are also making appearances: the “Drunk Women Solving Crime” podcasters will have a residency in Edinburgh, while Laura Nirider and Steven Drizin, lawyers featured in “Making a Murderer: Part 2,” will discuss the case.
But questions remain about the ethics of making entertainment out of murder. Do producers and consumers risk glamorizing these crimes, and possibly exonerating the perpetrators? And how much can we trust podcasts and TV shows to stick to the “true” part of the true crime label, knowing viewers’ thirst for well-paced, satisfying narratives?
As an art form, theater may be well-positioned to interrogate such questions. In “La Reprise” and “Bible John,” for instance, the actors directly address the audience and remind them of their shows’ artifice. The plays invite viewers to consider the power, and the limitations, of theater and storytelling as a way of making sense of human brutality.
The show features a mix of professional and nonprofessional actors who introduce themselves to the audience. They also restage conversations they conducted with Mr. Jarfi’s former partner, parents and one of his killers.
Mr. Rau rejects the idea that he is turning tragedy into cheap entertainment or using it to shock. Mr. Jarfi’s family “completely understood” his intentions, he said, even though he graphically restages their son’s murder. “I’m an artist, I believe in the power of art to heal, by repeating the trauma itself,” Mr. Rau said.
Caitlin McEwan, a Scottish playwright, also said she was not interested in making a “straight play” about true crime, but in producing “something that speaks to the audience and does something formally inventive,” she said. In “Bible John,” four women start off by playing present-day true crime podcast enthusiasts. Later, as their obsession deepens, the characters begin to re-enact scenes from the case, taking on the roles of victims and police officers.
Ms. Drezen, a “Saturday Night Live” writer and stand-up comic, had a theory as to why. “It’s like we’re preparing, we’re studying: obviously I’m going to get murdered at some point,” she laughed, darkly. In her show “Okay Get Home Safe!!” she explores her love of true crime, how we’re sold the idea that the world is dangerous for women, and the times when she actually has found herself in danger.
The creators of “The Incident Room,” David Byrne and Olivia Hirst, said that ethically they did not want to use “the murder of a woman as a dramatic foundation,” and to find other ways to make the show thrilling.
The Yorkshire Ripper case has been dramatized on British television several times. But in this version, the murderer is not depicted. Instead, the action is entirely set at the police station, where detectives on the case were often completely overwhelmed by the sheer volume of information. Mr. Byrne met with real officers, and had access to the archive of the investigative journalist Michael Bilton, to uncover the challenges of catching a suspect in the days before DNA testing or CCTV footage.
Mr. Byrne found himself as gripped by the case as by any true crime podcast. “I’ve been terrible at parties for the past two years, because it’s all I talk about,” he said.