It’s Friday. One of The Times’s first weather stories was published 167 years ago. Some parts of it have aged better than others.
Weather: Hot, hot, hot. Read on for more details.
You are about to experience the hottest days of the year.
How hot is it going to be this weekend?
It may feel north of 100 degrees. One meteorologist called the heat “dangerous.” It’s going to be so hot that Mayor de Blasio canceled his presidential campaign events to stay in the city.
How hot will it be?
Today, the temperature was expected to be near 91 degrees. It may feel more like 101, according to the National Weather Service.
Tomorrow, the high could exceed 97 degrees, and it may feel like 111.
Sunday’s high may surpass 95 degrees, and it could feel like 107. Rain and thundershowers might pop up that evening.
A heat wave is defined as three consecutive days of temperatures that reach or exceed 90 degrees.
By Monday, the heat is expected to break.
Is this heat wave a big deal?
How dangerous can a heat wave be?
Parts of Upper Manhattan and the Bronx are “particularly heat sensitive,” Ms. Madrigano said in a video by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Where can I go to cool off?
Here’s a map of the city’s cooling centers. You can type in your address, and it will tell you which centers are nearby.
The city’s Parks Department website lists parks with spray showers.
And here’s what you should know about the free city pools, courtesy of my colleague Corey Kilgannon.
What about the New York City Triathlon?
It was set for Sunday morning, but race organizers announced yesterday that they were canceling it, citing the heat and the humidity.
The race would have included a 1.5-kilometer swim in the Hudson River, a 40-kilometer bike ride in Upper Manhattan and the Bronx and a 10-kilometer run over “relentless hills” ending in Central Park.
To stay cool, should I take cold showers?
It’s better to take frequent showers with tepid or lukewarm water, according to the city’s health commissioner, Dr. Oxiris Barbot.
What is it supposed to feel like in July?
The normal high temperature for July 19 and July 20 is 84 degrees, according to the National Weather Service.
The hottest temperature ever recorded on July 19 was in 1977, when it hit 102 degrees. The hottest temperature ever recorded on July 20 was in 1980, when it was 101. The hottest temperature ever recorded on July 21 was also in 1977, when it hit 104.
Mt. Vernon has two mayors and a police chief who was arrested by his own officers.
A federal judge denied Jeffrey Epstein bail, rejecting his request to stay in his mansion under guard until his trial on sex-trafficking charges.
New charges are unlikely in the Stormy Daniels hush-money investigation that ensnared members of President Trump’s inner circle, federal prosecutors signaled.
Upside Pizza in Manhattan will get a smaller sibling in Brooklyn.
Something mo(on)mentous is coming up.
Tomorrow marks 50 years since man first walked and left bootprints on the moon. The media spectacle attracted more than 600 million viewers across the world.
New Yorkers — at bars, in appliance stores, on the street — couldn’t keep their eyes and ears away from television and radio broadcasts of the Apollo 11 mission.
At screenings tomorrow and Sunday at the Paley Center for Media in Manhattan, people can rewatch, or see for the first time, the grainy footage of mankind’s giant leap. Tickets are free and first-come, first-served.
“This was such a majestic event,” said Ron Simon, a television and radio curator at the Paley Center who helped create the anniversary programming. Mr. Simon said he wanted visitors to experience the original telecast to “get a feeling of what people might have been thinking or feeling” in 1969.
The center is also planning a talk later this year that explores the continuing impact of the moon-landing coverage and what it meant to the people involved.
Television “helped the public think about all the different possibilities of the future,” Mr. Simon said.
A steady rain was making my walk on West 60th Street a real slog. Nevertheless, I was soldiering on toward Columbus Circle when I noticed a small crowd huddled near the entrance to the Mandarin Oriental Hotel.
As I got closer, I noticed that everyone in the crowd was peering toward the doorway with their cellphones poised, ready to take photos.
“Who are you waiting to see?” I asked a woman as I passed by.
She replied without missing a beat.
