Art & Design|Where Are All the Bob Ross Paintings? We Found Them.
Where Are All the Bob Ross Paintings? We Found Them.
Bob Ross painted more than 1,000 landscapes for his television show — so why are they so hard to find? We solve one of the internet’s favorite little mysteries.
Watched the video? Here are a few more details.
Credit...Bob Ross Inc.
Other items include a converted stepladder that was used as an easel used during the first season of the show, and two handwritten notebooks that were used to plan the production of Seasons 2 and 3.
“The hardest part was choosing the paintings,” said Eric Jentsch, the entertainment and sports curator for the National Museum of American History. Mr. Jentsch and his colleague Ryan Lintelman visited the offices of Bob Ross Inc. in Herndon, Va., to find the images and materials that best exemplified Mr. Ross’s lifetime of work.
The Smithsonian also acquired fan letters sent to Mr. Ross, including some written after he died of lymphoma in 1995 at 52. “These letters help reveal the significant impact Ross has had on diverse individuals and communities, helping them to express and feel better about themselves,” Mr. Jentsch said.
According to an analysis by the website FiveThirtyEight, Mr. Ross painted in 381 of the 403 episodes of the show (the rest featured a guest). If three versions were made of each of those paintings, at least 1,143 originals would exist. Bob Ross Inc. estimates that it has 1,165 paintings stored on site.
But Mr. Ross also painted as an instructor, as well as for public events and for charity, so there may be additional paintings out there.
Can I visit Bob Ross Inc.?
Bob Ross Inc. is not open to visitors. Some of the original paintings are displayed at the Bob Ross Art Workshop & Gallery in New Smyrna Beach, Fla. Starting next year, people will be able to visit the studio in Muncie, Ind., where the show was taped.
According to Annette Kowalski, “Campfire” was among Mr. Ross’s least favorite paintings.
Though cabins often appear in Mr. Ross’s landscapes, they are rarely depicted with chimneys (another sign of people).
How did the Kowalskis come to own the company?
Originally Mr. Ross and his wife, Jane, shared ownership of the company with Annette and Walt Kowalski, who had helped to finance Mr. Ross’s early career. Jane Ross died in 1992; when Mr. Ross died in 1995, the company was left to the Kowalskis alone.
What’s the name of the Kowalskis’ dog?
What were the names of Bob Ross’s squirrels?
Mr. Ross had several pet squirrels, a number of which he featured on his show. One was named Bobette — a combination of Bob and Annette. Bobette appeared in several episodes in Series 18 (1989). Another squirrel, Peapod, appeared in Series 22 and 23 (1991). Peapod Jr. joined in Series 30 and 31 (1993-94).
What’s the story with the hair?
According to Annette Kowalski, Mr. Ross originally chose to perm his hair because it was cheaper than getting frequent haircuts.
Who was Bill Alexander?
William Alexander was the creator of “The Magic of Oil Painting,” which aired on PBS from 1974 to 1982. In 1984, he symbolically handed over his brush to Mr. Ross in a marketing campaign.
Did Bob Ross want his paintings to be shown?
