Piper Kerman, whose experiences and memoir inspired the Netflix prison dramedy, now works with inmates in correctional facilities.
In 2004, Piper Kerman, who had pleaded guilty to money laundering violations, entered federal prison. Thirteen months later, she left it. She wrote a memoir, “Orange Is the New Black,” and that book, in the hands of the showrunner Jenji Kohan, became one of the first hits of the streaming era. Piper Kerman became Piper Chapman (Taylor Schilling), a WASP convict whose story hooks the viewer just long enough to introduce dozens of characters who don’t have her white, middle-class advantages.
In the seventh and final season, which began streaming on Netflix Friday Piper Chapman wins parole. But Kerman is back in prison, voluntarily. In 2015, she and her husband, the writer Larry Smith, and their young son, relocated to Ohio, where she teaches narrative nonfiction in two correctional facilities.
Last week, the day after she had testified before a House Judiciary subcommittee about the experiences of women and girls in the criminal justice system, she spoke about the final season — its sex, its tragedy, its chicken — and the fund the show has created to promote criminal justice reform and support formerly incarcerated women. (A few mild spoilers follow.) These are excerpts from the conversation.
How often did you go to set during filming for the final season?
During my time in Ohio, my visits have been fewer, though I try to get to set as often as I can because I like to cheerlead. The bulk of my contribution has almost always been focused on answering questions from the writers’ room, to help them make the show very truthful in terms of the context of prison.
What did you discuss with Congress yesterday?
The hearing was before the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Crime, Terrorism, and — I always forget the third thing. [It’s Homeland Security.] It was focused exclusively on women and girls in the criminal justice system. The committee chose to screen a scene from the show: Maria, played by Jessica Pimentel, is returned to the prison immediately after giving birth, a reflection of something that I witnessed very early in my own prison sentence. You could have heard a pin drop in that room. Everyone understood the emotional impact. There’s no substitute for storytelling to drive these points home.
How similar are Piper Kerman and Piper Chapman?
What was it like to meet Taylor?
It was my first set visit, and I was very, very nervous. The scene that they were shooting was a scene closely drawn from the book — the one where I insult Pop, the character that Red is adapted from. My anxiety level began to drop as I watched the scene play out. Because I was like, Oh, this is good. That was my greatest fear, that the show wouldn’t be good. And then I did get to meet Taylor, and Taylor’s delightful. I couldn’t be more fond of her.
How does your husband Larry feel about his fictional counterpart, Jason Biggs’s Larry?
Larry has a good sense of humor and he loves Jason. He really enjoyed getting to know Jason. It’s hard to carry off that razor’s edge of humor.
Is it ever weird watching your character do sex scenes?
Look, Laura Prepon [the actress who plays Piper’s on-again, off-again girlfriend and fellow inmate] is really hot. I guess it’s weird. Yeah, it’s weird. But I appreciate that romance, these sort of star-crossed lovers.
Did you know that Piper was going to be the bait-and-switch to get us to care about characters who weren’t white and middle-class?
My book is often understood as a fish out of water story, because we’ve constructed a carceral system that’s focused disproportionately on poor people of color. My hope was that the book would attract readers who wouldn’t otherwise read a book about prison and that they would come away thinking and feeling differently about the people they had read about. The book is really about a community of women. I feel like the show is an absolute reflection of that. Almost any viewer could come to that show and find somebody that they care passionately about.
This season follows Piper after parole. How did you feel about her arc?
Her experience was not the same as mine. My return to the community was easier. Piper Chapman’s struggle through her re-entry, knowing she’s a person who’s much better positioned for success than the majority of people who are released from prison, is a reminder of just how hard it is. There are 700,000 people coming home from prison and jail in this country every year. So I’m glad they included a re-entry story.
 And all of the work that the writers’ room did on the story lines involving motherhood, and the relationships between mothers and children. Those are the most important story lines, as much as I love lesbian drama.
In the final season, did any character endings make you especially happy?
Taystee. Danielle Brooks’s portrayal of her is really, really powerful. That’s the one that really moves me the most.
Any that made you very sad?
There’s a lot of sadness there. That’s appropriate for the material. Not all stories have happy endings, that’s a truthful reflection of the world. I get asked constantly, Is the show realistic? And I’m like, the show is very truthful. That’s what’s important for people to understand. It’s a truthful telling of the world that we live in right now.
Which episodes made you cry the most?
I almost cried yesterday, in that House hearing room, when they screened that scene. I’m not a big crier. I’m kind of a tough cookie.
So Poussey’s death didn’t get you?
No, Poussey’s death was devastating. For many people it is this watershed moment in how they think and feel about the show, and hopefully about the prison system. American prisons and jails are harsh, horrible, incredibly punitive places, because that’s how we built them to be. One of the most important things about the show is that it shows beautiful moments of humanity and kindness. That’s the reason that the show has inspired such passionate devotion.
What can you tell me about the Poussey Washington Fund?
Many fans who come to the show have some sort of personal lived experience relative to the criminal justice system. Many fans want the system to do better, to be reformed, to be transformed. This is one way that fans can contribute directly to organizations that are doing that transformation on the ground. I also hope the fans are inspired within their own communities. Whether that’s going and volunteering at a jail or a prison themselves, or getting involved in judicial elections or prosecutorial elections. Fans of the show actually have a direct say in how some of these decisions ultimately get made, if they are paying attention.