LONDON — In a series of leaked diplomatic cables, Britain’s ambassador to the United States, Kim Darroch, described President Trump as “radiating insecurity” and his administration as diplomatically “clumsy and inept,” a withering assessment that threatened to damage bilateral relations at a delicate moment for Britain.
The cables were published late on Saturday by The Mail on Sunday, span a period from 2017 to the present and include candid assessments of American domestic politics and Washington’s treatment of Iran over its nuclear weapons program.
The most closely held of the cables was intended as an update on the new Trump administration for a narrow audience of top British officials. It described the chaos inside the new administration, the concerns about the future of the Atlantic relationship and the struggle to figure out who had the president’s ear.
It was unclear who leaked the documents and how The Mail obtained them. But the British news outlet identified only one recipient in Britain: Mark Sedwill, a longtime British diplomat who succeeded Mr. Darroch as national security adviser and became cabinet secretary in 2018.
A statement by the British Foreign Office made it clear that the documents were authentic. It said: “The British public would expect our ambassadors to provide ministers with an honest, unvarnished assessment of the politics in their country. Their views are not necessarily the views of ministers or indeed the government.
The British government recently hosted the American president for his first state visit, which included a lavish banquet at Buckingham Palace and a 41-gun salute — gestures apparently aimed at winning his good will.
As Britain barrels toward Brexit, set for Oct. 31, a hard exit from the European Union appears more likely, and Mr. Trump has repeatedly dangled an advantageous trade deal with the United States.
The diplomat noted that Mr. Trump has regularly survived scandals in the past, and suggested that he could win a second term as president. “Trump may emerge from the flames, battered but intact, like Schwarzenegger in the final scenes of ‘The Terminator,’ ” Mr. Darroch wrote, referring to the 1984 science-fiction film.
A theory among British officials in the United States is that the leak had less to do with Mr. Darroch than with his successor. The ambassador would ordinarily be finishing up his time in Washington around the end of 2019 or the beginning of 2020. The long-running assumption is that he would be succeeded by Mr. Sedwill.
Mr. Sedwill has been in the cross-hairs of pro-Brexit politicians. The leak, according to this theory, may have been intended to assure that Mr. Sedwill was not appointed, and that a more pro-Trump, pro-Brexit diplomat would be sent to fill Britain’s most prestigious ambassadorial post.
A diplomat for 29 years, Mr. Darroch has handled many of the country’s most sensitive international issues. He has served as Britain’s permanent representative to the European Union, as head of the Foreign Office’s press office and as national security adviser.
On Sunday, he declined to comment on the leak of the cables.
Mr. Trump then recommended, via Twitter, that his friend Mr. Farage, then the leader of the U.K. Independence Party, be appointed as ambassador to Washington in Mr. Darroch’s place. “He would do a great job!” Mr. Trump wrote.
A Downing Street spokesman responded swiftly then that Mr. Darroch had the government’s support.
While all the observations in the leaked cables have been echoed in books and news articles, it closely reflected the frustrations that Mr. Darroch and other foreign diplomats had reported during the period, as they sought to get access to the administration and feared that many long-running initiatives might run off the rails. Few of them had even conversed with the secretary of state at the time, Rex Tillerson.
But the trove included some more recent cables, including one written just hours after Mr. Trump reversed himself and decided not to go ahead with a military strike on Iranian bases after the shoot-down of an American drone.
Again, the cable described a chaotic policy process at the White House, though Mr. Darroch concluded that the president came out in the right place and avoided a bigger conflict — even if he got to the decision in the most meandering of policy debates, including consultations outside his own national security staff.
• The ambassador advised against taking the path chosen by Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany and President Emmanuel Macron of France, who were shunning Mr. Trump. “I don’t think we should follow them,” he wrote, advising that British interlocutors should sometimes push back.
“Arguably, you get more respect from this president if you stand up to him occasionally — provided the public comments do not come as a surprise and are judicious, calm and avoid personalizing,” he wrote.