Parenting|Are Mom Friends Necessary?
Are Mom Friends Necessary?
It took me years to make close parent relationships in my community, and that’s O.K.
This week in NYT Parenting, we have a few pieces about finding parent friends after you have kids. There’s a useful and hilarious guide by Lyz Lenz, where she describes her downtrodden state after she had her second child: “I felt alone, and my nipples ached while I cleaned poop off the floor. What I needed was a friend.” While Lyz’s guide has many tips for making friends in person, if meeting people I.R.L. is not your style, Claire Zulkey has an article for us about how to create your own Internet-based group of like-minded parents.
Though groups both online and in person are a wonderful lifeline for many, I’d like to offer a gentle counterpoint in this newsletter: Not everyone needs parent friends in those heady early days. I didn’t make any until my older daughter was in preschool, because all my initial efforts to make them felt forced, awkward and ultimately unsatisfying.
I was the first of my close friends to have kids; getting pregnant at 29 is a completely mundane occurrence in most parts of the universe, but in my corner of New York City it was met with shock and cries of, “But you’re so young!” Despite being the first of my set, I had been working in women’s media for long enough to know that you were supposed to have mom friends — women to stroll around the park with on maternity leave, people to text when your baby was gassy and you were exhausted.
So I dutifully joined my local online parent community and signed up for the December 2012 moms group, which was for women due that month. There was a message board just for us, and in-person meetups that began when we were all still pregnant, though I didn’t feel up to going to any of them until my daughter was about a month old.
It was a bitterly cold January day, and I had to bundle my baby in approximately 47 layers to make the 10-block walk to a stranger’s apartment. I remember walking in and not knowing where to put my kid while I unloaded our stuff and stripped out of all that polar fleece. Then I recall trying to find a seat in a sea of strangers already sprawled out on the available floor and couch space, worried that I would tip over and step on someone’s infant.
I want to stress that the women I met that day were perfectly kind. I don’t recall many specifics of the stilted conversation more than six years later, except for one mom getting offended because another mom suggested her baby had a small head. But I do remember looking around the room at one point and thinking: The only thing we have in common is that we were all knocked up in March. Which is really not the best foundation for even a short-term relationship. Being around people who were not my people made me feel lonelier than being alone.
After that, I started questioning whether I really needed a whole different group of friends for this next life stage. The assumption that I now belonged to some new category of person rankled; I still felt like the same old crank. I had my husband, who was heavily involved with our baby and just as sleepless and clueless as I was, and we bonded more deeply over the shared experience.
Unlike the pop-cultural depictions of rifts between parents and their child-free pals, the close friends I already had were happy to hear me talk about being a mom. What’s more, I had my own mom to talk to about what I was going through if I really needed an ear from a veteran. I know how lucky I am to have had such a robust support network to save me from the very real isolation of new motherhood, and for that I’ll always be grateful.
In time, some of my pre-existing friends, the ones I had made because of shared interests and personalities, had kids themselves, and now we have yearslong text chains about our children alongside gossip and other sundry complaints. When my older daughter entered preschool, I finally did make a friend I’d met through our kids, but it took us a year to get close enough to start texting frequently about our lives beyond the arrangement of play dates.
Our relationship was sealed when I waddled into preschool heavily pregnant with my second daughter and she asked me how I was feeling. My response was something like, “Terrible.” She laughed. I knew I had found a kindred spirit.
We want to hear from you about your experiences with friends after you became parents: Did you make them quickly? Did you need them? Did you want them and not find them? Did you have a nightmarish experience at a mom meetup? Tell us everything here.
P.S. Thank you to all who shared your stories about how you determined the size of your families. We have a roundup of your responses here.
P.P.S. Forward this email the parent friend you text at 3 in the morning. Follow us on Instagram @NYTParenting. Join us on Facebook. Find us on Twitter for the latest updates. Read last week’s newsletter about the concept of “emotional bandwidth” and why I’m resisting the urge to have a third child.
I adored this essay from Dedan K. Bruner about how he learned to be a dad, which involved forming friendships with the circle of dads he met working on Capitol Hill.
Unlike cranky me, J. Courtney Sullivan found that mom friends were absolutely essential in the trenches of early motherhood. Read her beautiful essay about those bonds.
If you ARE like cranky me, you should definitely watch Episode 2 from Season 2 of “Catastrophe,” streaming on Amazon, where the protagonist Sharon struggles to make friends with the “mom-bies” in mommy-and-me class.
My children thought bran flakes were chips until they learned to read.
— Jen Goode Stevens, Clarksville, Tenn.