Ms. Kor took young people on annual summer tours of Auschwitz. While conducting a tour, she died on Thursday at 85 at a hotel in Krakow, Poland, near the site of the former death camp. It was there that she and her twin, Miriam, had been among some 1,500 sets of twins who were victims of experiments, including the injections of germs, overseen by the German doctor Josef Mengele.
Her death was announced by the Candles Holocaust Museum and Education Center (for Children of Auschwitz — Nazi Deadly Lab Experiments), which she had opened in 1995 in Terre Haute, Ind. She had settled there in 1960 with her husband, Michael Kor, a fellow Holocaust survivor.
Ms. Kor and her sister created a nonprofit organization, named Candles, in 1984, after locating more than 100 other twins who had been tortured by Mengele, hoping they would connect with each other so many years later.
Ms. Kor began speaking about her experiences at Auschwitz after the airing of NBC’s 1978 television mini-series “Holocaust.” She told of suffering and death in her memoir “Echoes of Auschwitz” (2000) and in documentaries, in talks and on social media and tours sponsored by her museum.
Known as “the woman in blue” for the outfits she favored, she had boundless energy.
“People would see pictures of her and think, ‘Here’s a 4-foot-9 sweet little old lady,’ and I would want to quickly disabuse them of those notions,” Kiel Majewski, the first executive director of the Candles museum, told WBAA radio of West Lafayette, Ind., upon her death. “She was a nonstop bulldozer,” he said.
Eva and Miriam Mozes were born on Jan. 21, 1934, into a Jewish farming family in the village of Portz in northern Transylvania, then a part of Romania but later a region of Hungary, which came under German military occupation late in World War II. The family was deported to Auschwitz in 1944.
In a remembrance written for the Forgiveness Project, founded in 2004 to share stories from victims and perpetrators of crime and conflict who have rebuilt their lives, Ms. Kor recounted her ordeal at Auschwitz.
The twins’ father, Alexander; their mother, Jaffa; and their older sisters, Edit and Aliz, who had been separated from them upon the family’s arrival at Auschwitz, died there.
Auschwitz was liberated by the Soviet army on Jan. 27, 1945, and Eva and Miriam emigrated to Israel.
Eva’s son, Alex, a physician, told The Associated Press that she had had heart and respiratory problems recently. In addition to her son, her survivors include her husband and her daughter, Rina Kor. Her sister Miriam died in 1993.
Ms. Kor’s Holocaust museum was destroyed in 2003 by arsonists, believed to be white supremacists, but it was rebuilt two years later.
Ms. Kor, who worked in real estate for many years, traveled to Germany in 1993 to meet with a former doctor at Auschwitz, Hans Münch, who had been acquitted of war crimes. He accepted her invitation to go to Auschwitz with her and sign a document acknowledging the existence of the camp’s gas chambers. On the 50th anniversary of its liberation, they stood together before the charred ruins of its crematories.
Ms. Kor composed a letter to Dr. Münch expressing her belief in forgiving tormentors, as a thank you for his gesture.
