They roasted hot dogs on the pavement and cracked open champagne from a warming fridge. “I loved the darkness,” one said.
A major blackout had knocked out power to much of the West Side of Manhattan on Saturday night, but Danielle Allen sat in the crook of a doorway with the blissed-out look of a sunbather.
“It’s beautiful,” said Ms. Allen, a songwriter, gazing at sidewalks filled with neighbors who had abandoned their apartments (too hot) and traffic that was moving even slower than usual (dormant traffic lights).
The power failure, apparently caused by a malfunctioning substation, disrupted life for hundreds of thousands of people in Manhattan for several hours on a warm summertime weekend evening.
But from the men roasting hot dogs over a candle on the pavement to the friends using the excuse of a warming fridge to crack open champagne, some New Yorkers did not curse the darkness — they often seemed to enjoy it.
In Times Square, the lights had gone out on Broadway about an hour before curtain, and shows had stayed dark. But cast members cheered up disappointed patrons with impromptu street-side songs.
Outside “Hadestown,” a horn tootled as André De Shields belted a riff on its opening number, subbing in blackout-related themes.
On the pavement in front of “Come From Away,” a full band and cast performed the show’s first tune.
Of course, some people saw nothing amusing about the blackout. It was terrifying for passengers briefly trapped in subway cars. Others, especially older adults, feared that they would not be able to leave apartment buildings because elevators were out of order.
Businesses, from restaurants and bars to movie theaters, lost money. And it was a hectic night for police officers, firefighters and other emergency personnel.
There were no reports of deaths from the blackout, the authorities said.
The power failed at 6:47 p.m., and it was at least three hours before it began returning in stages.
At 46th Street, first it was a traffic light that went from yellow to green in an instant.
Then, the bright lights inside Healthy Mart, at the corner of 45th Street and 10th Avenue, followed suit, illuminating the store’s operator, Alla Saleh, 32, who sighed in relief behind the counter.
But just 10 blocks downtown, it was still lights out at AM-PM Deli — almost.
Mohsen Nadi, 56, the owner, had borrowed a generator from a friend who is a hot-dog vendor.
It whirred on the sidewalk and generated enough watts to illuminate a single bulb in the store.
Still, the power-haves — gloating with their crisply blowing air-conditioners while power have-nots sweated — set off some grousing.
Sweltering in his apartment, Larry Moran, who works in real estate, escaped outdoors in Hell’s Kitchen.
When a doorman called and told a woman named Katherine that the lights were back on at her home on West 52nd Street, she skipped back from Chelsea. She flicked a little flashlight back and forth on the sidewalk as she hustled through a still darkened-patch of the city.
She had weathered the blackout at a friend’s apartment.
“It’s a great New York story. You may have had a hardship through it, for a minute or two, but people come together,” she said.
By midnight, the power was back across Manhattan.
