WASHINGTON — Treasury Secretary Steven Mnuchin informed congressional leaders on Friday that the government could run out of money in early September, pleading with lawmakers to reach a deal to raise the government’s borrowing limit before their August recess or risk a potentially catastrophic default.
He and Speaker Nancy Pelosi of California have spoken by phone multiple times this week, including a 20-minute conversation on Friday afternoon, about federal spending caps and raising the debt ceiling to prevent governmentwide spending cuts. They agreed that they would most likely speak again over the weekend, according to a Democratic leadership aide.
Negotiations between lawmakers and administration officials on Capitol Hill have intensified, as the threat of what could be a disastrous fiscal crisis grows closer. There is little appetite for what could be a politically tense stand-alone vote to raise the debt ceiling, and lawmakers do not want to approve a stopgap spending bill that keeps the money flowing for a year but does not reflect Congress’s changing priorities.
But only a handful of working days remain for both chambers before the August break.
The idea of a one-year continuing resolution, the congressional term for a short-term spending bill, has been widely panned on Capitol Hill, with 15 Senate Republicans sending a letter this month urging administration officials to avoid it.
But with divided government, the fate of a deal largely rests with Ms. Pelosi, who will have to wrangle the moderate and liberal factions of her majority, and President Trump, who has proved to be an unpredictable factor in spending negotiations.
“It’s time that we got serious on a bipartisan basis to try to work this out and not have the kind of chaos that goes along with our inability to come together on these kind of important issues,” said Senator Mitch McConnell, Republican of Kentucky and the majority leader, at a news conference on Tuesday.
The federal government has already run a $747 billion budget deficit for the 2019 fiscal year, which ends in September — a 23 percent increase from the year before. That is an unusually large increase given the strength of economic growth.
Total personal and corporate income tax levels are down slightly from the previous year, Treasury Department statistics show. Federal spending has risen — particularly for national defense and health care programs — and so have the interest costs on the growing national debt. Those trends reflect Washington’s free-spending ways and the rising costs of an aging population as the baby boom generation draws Social Security and Medicare benefits.
Those dynamics have yet to prompt a renewed interest in the deficit, but they are intensifying pressure on lawmakers to raise the debt limit — or risk economic catastrophe if they do not.
A 2018 budget deal in Congress suspended the limit, which constrains the amount of money the government may borrow to continue paying its bills, until this past March 1. Once that deadline passed, the Treasury Department was forced to begin employing “extraordinary measures” in order to maintain the borrowing needed to keep paying soldiers, issuing Social Security checks and otherwise funding the government.
Those measures include premature redemption of Treasury bonds owned by federal employees’ retirement accounts, borrowing cash set aside to smooth exchange rate fluctuations and stopping contributions to some government pension funds.
Mr. Mnuchin’s letter is a warning that those sleight-of-the-balance-sheet efforts cannot last forever. When the Treasury Department runs out of them, it will not have enough money coming in to pay its spending obligations. That would necessitate either sharp and immediate spending cuts, or a government default on some of its obligations — not paying workers, contractors, lenders or citizens it owes money to.
Economists generally warn that such a default would at minimum destabilize the economy and raise future government borrowing costs. In a worst case, it could shock the economy into recession.
But efforts to raise the borrowing limit have been tied up with broader budget negotiations. Lawmakers in both parties want to set higher spending caps for military and domestic spending for the coming fiscal year, which begins in October. If no agreement can be reached, statutory, across-the-board spending cuts will slice through the government on Jan. 1, as the strict, austere spending limits set by the Budget Control Act of 2011 come back into force.
Democrats have insisted that domestic spending increases equal the military spending increases demanded by President Trump. But some Republicans, led by the acting White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, are resisting that demand.
That dynamic has kept budget talks in a stalemate for weeks.