The postmodern Hamptons house was commissioned by the artist Norman Mercer in the 1970s and is on the market for $9.5 million.
An architectural alien dressed in shingles and passing itself off as just another roomy East Hampton beach house — no one will be fooled — is on the market at 33 Ocean Avenue for $9.5 million.
Designed by Robert A.M. Stern, the former dean of the Yale School of Architecture, and completed in 1975, the 6,963-square-foot house on 2.16 acres is an exuberant postmodern mash-up of boxes and swoops with ocean views and 190 feet of Hook Pond frontage. The listing agent is Denise Wilder of Douglas Elliman.
Its original owners, Norman and Carol Mercer, both worked from this home. Mr. Mercer, a businessman-turned-artist who died in 2007 at the age of 91, made popsicle-colored, cast-acrylic sculptures, while Mrs. Mercer, a landscape designer, used the grounds to demo her plantings. In 1997 she told Newsday that keeping the gardens perfectly groomed and ready for inspection meant rising every morning at 6 a.m. “It’s like having your good clothes on all the time,” she said.
After she died in 2016 at 92, the property was listed at $13.9 million and sat on the market, its price falling like shriveled petals. Jeffrey Gates and R. Michael Moran, a married couple next door, watched and worried that a house that had won notice from architectural critics like Vincent Scully and Paul Goldberger would fall into the hands of a spec builder and vanish from the earth.
Early last year, they bought it themselves, paying $9.4 million and spending an estimated $800,000 to reverse what they described as disrepair and adulteration. “The house was in bad shape; it showed terribly,” Mr. Moran said.
Now the walls are white and the studio and greenhouse gone, replaced — with the Stern office’s blessing — with a large guest suite. (The house has five bedrooms with en suite bathrooms, a sixth bedroom that lacks a private bathroom and a one-bedroom caretaker’s quarters sans kitchen over the garage.) A sunroom, where the sellers said they first found giant, spiny plants suggestive of “Little Shop of Horrors,” displays the only Norman Mercer sculpture left on the premises — a transparent acrylic mobile dangling from the double-height ceiling.
A flight of stairs with clear plastic siding (not in homage to the former owner, but to bring the stairs up to code) leads to a roof deck with ocean views and an aerial perspective of the 50-foot-long heated swimming pool. Until recently, the croquet-demanding backyard lawn flowed all the way to the pond. A wetlands buffer of shrubs and grasses now protects the water from runoff.
Mrs. Mercer’s plantings spread out at your feet here, from gatherings of butterfly bushes, Montauk daisies and willows to formal beds of salvia, astilbe and bearded iris. In front, roses, junipers and yew form a welcoming committee, and throughout the property colors and scents erupt in their season from maples, star magnolias, burning bush trees and rhododendrons.
The sellers intended to use the property as a guesthouse, but guests haven’t been so plentiful recently, Mr. Moran said. And anyway, the couple’s mission should be accomplished by now.
“We like saving things,” he said.