WASHINGTON — Chief Justice John G. Roberts Jr. has said he sometimes misses the old days, when “the sole practitioner with the battered briefcase” would arrive in Washington from the hinterlands to argue a once-in-a-career case at the Supreme Court. These days, that lawyer has usually been replaced by one specializing in Supreme Court advocacy.
The rise of the elite Supreme Court bar has been rapid. In the early 1980s, fewer than a quarter of lawyers arguing before the justices had ever done so before. In recent years, some 60 percent had.
For the most part, the justices say they welcome the development. Supreme Court specialists, they say, understand the interlocking doctrines that shape the law, the various justices’ habits of mind and the rapid-fire rhythms of oral arguments.
But do specialists win more often than the lawyers with battered briefcases?
A new study tries to answer the question. It comes from two political scientists who were inclined to be doubtful. Like most political scientists, they believed that ideology rather than advocacy generally determines the results in Supreme Court cases.
To their surprise, they found that experienced lawyers obtained measurably better results at the Supreme Court than ones making their debuts.
Having imposed that restriction, the study used statistical methods to match novice and experienced lawyers who were alike in other ways to try to isolate the value of experience.
The study, which considered cases between 1980 and 2018, used a simple criterion to separate experienced lawyers from others: whether they had ever argued in the Supreme Court before. Other studies have used more elaborate definitions. A leading one, from Richard J. Lazarus, a law professor at Harvard, said expert Supreme Court litigators were those who had presented at least five arguments to the justices or who worked in offices whose lawyers had collectively argued in the court more than 10 times.
Professor Nelson said the data showed that the first argument was the key one.
A 2013 study, from Jeffrey L. Fisher, a law professor at Stanford and a leading Supreme Court litigator, used the stricter definition of expertise and considered a smaller number of cases. It also found that Supreme Court specialists enjoyed a significant advantage in cases against the federal government.
The new study also considered whether lawyers had attended a leading law school as determined by U.S. News & World Report (Yale, Stanford, Harvard, the University of Chicago and Columbia) or had served as a law clerk to a Supreme Court justice.
A Supreme Court clerkship was not an advantage, at least initially, Professor Nelson said.
The alternative, Professor Nelson said, was putting a hard-fought case at risk.
