A brain-invading parasite has made nearly 100 people sick in Hawaii in the last decade. How worried should health officials be?
A tropical parasite transmitted through rats and snails has caught the attention of health officials in Hawaii. But few scientists have studied the infection once it makes its way into humans, and researchers can’t say for certain whether the disease is becoming more widespread.
Although the larvae can’t grow into adult worms in a human host, they still can cause various complications, including flulike symptoms, headaches, stiff necks and bursts of nerve pain that seem to shift from one part of the body to another. M.R.I. scans suggest that the worms can also wriggle into the brain, leading to eosinophilic meningitis, which in rare cases can cause paralysis.
But overall, the study did not find a rise in the number of cases across the state. Rat lungworm disease still affects relatively few people, causing from one to 21 cases each year. So any fluctuations in the number of cases can appear more dramatic than they actually are, Mr. Johnston said.
And earlier this year, Dr. Jarvi and her colleagues discovered that when semi-slugs drown in water, rat lungworm larvae can escape the drowning host and survive freely in water for at least 21 days. That may enable the larvae to contaminate rain-catchment tanks in residential areas and to find their way into shrimp, prawns and land crabs.
Outreach campaigns in communities and cautionary signs at airports could help increase awareness about the parasite and decrease infections among both residents and tourists, Dr. Jarvi added.
There are no long-term clinical studies of rat lungworm infection in humans. Anecdotal evidence from ­­patients in a support group led by Dr. Jarvi, Dr. Martell and others suggests there is an urgent need for better diagnosis and treatments.
C.D.C. researchers have also noted a few sporadic cases of rat lungworm infection in Texas, Tennessee and Alabama. And because the parasite is quite adaptable, it could find hosts in other parts of the United States where the weather is favorable for slugs and snails.
