Chaser, often described as “the world’s smartest dog,” made headlines worldwide for being able to identify objects by their names.
Many owners struggle to teach their dogs to sit, fetch or even bark on command, but John W. Pilley, a professor emeritus of psychology at Wofford College, taught his Border collie to understand more than 1,000 nouns, a feat that earned them both worldwide recognition.
For some time, Dr. Pilley had been conducting his own experiment teaching dogs the names of objects and was inspired by Border collie farmers to rethink his methods.
Dr. Pilley was given a black-and-white Border collie as a gift by his wife Sally.
For three years, Dr. Pilley trained the dog, named Chaser, four to five hours a day: He showed her an object, said its name up to 40 times, then hid it and asked her to find it. He used 800 cloth animal toys, 116 balls, 26 Frisbees and an assortment of plastic items to ultimately teach Chaser 1,022 nouns.
In 2013, Dr. Pilley published his findings that explained that Chaser was taught to understand sentences containing a prepositional object, verb and direct object.
Chaser died on Tuesday at 15. She had been living with Dr. Pilley’s wife and their daughter Robin in Spartanburg. Dr. Pilley died last year at 89.
Ms. Bianchi, who helped her father train Chaser, said the dog had been undergoing acupuncture for arthritis but had no other known illnesses.
Ms. Bianchi said Chaser was buried in the backyard with the family’s other beloved dogs and with some of her father’s ashes.
“Her language learning is very high-level, powerful science,” she said.
Chaser understood that words have independent meaning and understood common nouns as well as proper nouns, Ms. Bianchi said.
If Chaser had 30 balls, Ms. Bianchi said, she would be able to understand each one by its proper-noun name and also as a part of a group of objects. “She learned the theory of one to many and many to one, which is learning one object could have many names and many names can apply to one object or one person,” she said.
Greg Nelson, a veterinarian at Central Veterinary Associates in Valley Stream, N.Y., said humans were learning that animals have a deeper understanding of the world around them.
Ms. Bianchi said that Hub City Animal Project, an organization dedicated to animal homelessness, sponsored a bronze statue of Chaser that will be placed outside the Children’s Museum of the Upstate in Spartanburg next year.
Dr. Pilley’s footprints, also in bronze, will be placed beside the statue of Chaser, and a portion of a street near the museum will be renamed Chaser the Border Collie Boulevard, according to Ms. Bianchi.
