They are unequaled in play and unequal in pay.
Ms. Crouse, an editor with Op-Docs, is a sub-elite marathon runner.
It’s a little bittersweet that so many girls turned out to cheer on the national women’s soccer team at a ticker-tape parade in Manhattan on Wednesday, wearing their favorite players’ jerseys or clutching posters of Megan Rapinoe, a top scorer in the Women’s World Cup.
Those girls will run harder, wake up earlier and practice a little longer so maybe one day they too can shoot a goal with as much power and grace as Rose Lavelle. That’s because they think it’s about more than just soccer. They think America rewards excellence.
And then they’ll grow up and learn that if they want to be like their heroes, they’ll have to fight every step of the way. Because for women, even world championships don’t guarantee equality. That’s why we have to keep the pressure on.
The photo was exciting. It showed a woman who had lost control. She had torn off her shirt and skidded to her knees in euphoria in her sports bra. She looked joyous and strong and reckless. She looked so cool. I grabbed the issue and took it straight to my room to read the article, which explained in breathless terms that the moment was surely a turning point for women athletes.
Just like the images of this year’s triumphant World Cup team, that photo of Ms. Chastain’s celebration achieved what it was meant to do: It inspired girls like me. But in retrospect, it’s also kind of sad. We didn’t know how rare those images were going to be.
Now those girls who taped that picture of Ms. Chastain to our bedroom walls are grown-ups. We became managers, doctors, journalists, just as we were told we could. Some of us even became Olympians. And we’re still fighting the same fights.
The United States women’s soccer team has become an excruciating example of a scenario we’ve seen play out for decades: Little girls are told to follow their dreams, and to excel, until they become women and expect be paid for it.
Twenty-eight national team players sued the United States Soccer Federation in March, claiming it pays them less, provides unequal playing conditions and does not promote their games as much as it does those of the men’s team. If both teams played and won the same number of “friendly” matches in a year, according to the lawsuit, the women would earn, at most, $99,000. The men, $263,320 on average.
As the score hovered at a draw in the World Cup final last Sunday, I couldn’t forget that if the American women didn’t win, it would probably undercut the discussion around their push for equal pay. Even though that would make them second in the world, and after they won the last tournament in 2015. (The last time the American men won a medal in the World Cup it was 1930.) To get what they deserve, the women need to be perfect.
Maybe that’s part of why the team ran up scores like 13-0 during this World Cup; they need a narrative of dominance in order to make their case to get paid the same as men who aren’t even on the same level.
And they won while having every quote, every celebratory gesture scrutinized by the public and the president alike. Americans who didn’t like how Alex Morgan sipped tea or how Megan Rapinoe refused to sing the national anthem even rooted for them to lose.
Of course, there are reasons the men’s team makes more money; there always are. But one of the more intractable excuses is that the world thinks of men’s sports, like many men’s ventures, as profitable businesses worth investing in. Women’s sports are relegated to inspiration. Why else would the United States women’s team, composed of working adults, have the unfathomably patronizing slogan “Dare to Shine”?
Money makes money — women can play and win all they want. (Provided we are grateful for the opportunity.) But the system is created by men, for men. We pay for what we value. And if we invest in women’s soccer as though there won’t be an audience, we’ll make that come true.
Today, 40 percent of all athletes are female — inspired by role models like Brandi Chastain, as this team was. But they receive only 4 percent of media coverage.
Since 2000, the only female athlete to achieve the distinction of Sports Illustrated’s athlete of the year has been Serena Williams. She’s also chronically the only woman on the list of the world’s 100 top-paid athletes — one of the best athletes of all time, right there this year at No. 63. Of course, even she had to fight hard for what she’s earned. And rewarding a best-in-history woman in a sea of men is not equality.
After all these years, I still admire Brandi Chastain. I played soccer as I grew up and became a competitive distance runner. That photo of her is timeless; it has stayed with me far longer than that World Cup game.
That’s partly because there wasn’t the predicted flood of famous female athletes, in soccer or otherwise, to take its place. It remains disappointingly remarkable to see a woman celebrated for her athletic achievements (at least, when it comes to celebrating what her body can do, as opposed to what it can look like).
The photos of Megan Rapinoe and her victory pose also are likely to stand out to the girls looking on for decades. But I hope the images endure for showing that this time, things changed.
Lindsay Crouse (@lindsaycrouse) is a senior staff editor for Op-Docs.