SAN FRANCISCO — Facebook was ordered on Wednesday to create new layers of oversight for its collection and handling of users’ data by the Federal Trade Commission, as the agency detailed a privacy settlement with the social network that became a referendum on how aggressive American regulators would be against big tech companies.
Under the agreement, the F.T.C. mandated that the Silicon Valley company add new positions and practices to increase the transparency and accountability of how it treats people’s information. The agency also formally imposed a record $5 billion fine against Facebook for deceiving users about their ability to control the privacy of their personal data.
Yet the measures, which the F.T.C.’s commissioners approved in a 3-to-2 vote this month, drew sharp criticism for not going far enough in curbing the data habits of the world’s largest social media company. Republican and Democratic lawmakers pilloried the settlement as a drop in the bucket for Facebook and said the F.T.C. failed to limit a core practice that has repeatedly raised privacy questions: the company’s gathering, sharing and use of people’s personal information.
That puts American regulators in a difficult position as authorities around the world have stepped up their actions to crimp the power of tech companies like Facebook, Google, Amazon and Apple. Over the past few years, the United States has been seen as a lesser force in tech regulation, especially compared with European officials who have passed laws and imposed a series of large penalties against the tech giants.
The F.T.C. agreement “utterly fails to penalize Facebook in any effective way,” said Senator Josh Hawley, a Republican of Missouri.
Senator Ron Wyden, an Oregon Democrat who is pushing for new federal privacy laws, said the settlement would not deter Facebook from further privacy violations.
“The F.T.C. is sending the message that wealthy executives and massive corporations can rampantly violate Americans’ privacy and lie about how our personal information is used and abused and get off with no meaningful consequences,” he said.
Within the F.T.C., the settlement was divisive, with the agency’s three Republican commissioners voting to approve the deal while the two Democratic commissioners dissented. The agreement stopped short of more punitive measures that the F.T.C. had previously discussed against Facebook, including holding the chief executive Mark Zuckerberg personally liable for missteps and potentially taking the company to court. The fine was also a fraction of Facebook’s $56 billion in annual revenue.
The agency also agreed the settlement would shield Facebook from known claims of violations before June 12, 2019, essentially giving the company a pass on its past. And it provided immunity to Facebook officers and directors.
In a statement, the F.T.C.’s Republican commissioners — including the chairman, Joseph J. Simons — said they were “proud” of the agreement. The measures “will provide significant deterrence not just to Facebook, but to every other company that collects or uses consumer data,” they said.
The F.T.C.’s two Democratic commissioners disagreed. “I fear it leaves the American public vulnerable,” said Rebecca Kelly Slaughter, a Democratic commissioner.
Rohit Chopra, another Democratic commissioner, warned that the terms of the settlement shielded Facebook from a wide range of problematic practices. “This shield represents a major win for Facebook, but leaves the public in the dark as to how the company violated the law and what violations, if any, are going unaddressed,” he said.
Mr. Zuckerberg said in a Facebook post that the F.T.C.’s orders “go beyond anything required under U.S. law today.” He added that he supported the agreement because it would “reduce the number of mistakes we make and help us deliver stronger privacy protections for everyone.” Facebook will report its quarterly earnings later on Wednesday.
The F.T.C. unveiled the settlement as lawmakers and regulators have recently ratcheted up pressure on Google, Facebook, Apple and Amazon.
Yet it’s unclear if those moves will lead to penalties or changes at the tech companies. That made the F.T.C. agreement the clearest indicator of how far American regulators would go to limit the firms.
For Facebook, the F.T.C. settlement does not end its regulatory and legal headaches.
The Securities and Exchange Commission said on Wednesday that it had imposed a penalty of $100 million against Facebook for making misleading disclosures to investors about the risks of misuse of user data. The agency charged that Facebook had known for two years about the misuse of users’ data — and had shared that information with company employees — yet misleadingly presented those risks to investors as merely hypothetical.
The F.T.C. began examining whether the Cambridge Analytica scandal meant that Facebook had violated a 2011 privacy settlement with the agency. Under that earlier agreement, the company had agreed not to deceive people over how their information was used and shared.
On Wednesday, the F.T.C. said it had also agreed to settle with Cambridge Analytica’s former chief executive, Alexander Nix, and Aleksandr Kogan, an app developer who worked with the company. In contrast to the immunity the F.T.C. gave Facebook executives, the agency prohibited Mr. Nix and Mr. Kogan from certain business practices.
With Facebook, the F.T.C. mandated the social network create an independently appointed privacy committee on its board that would review decisions affecting user privacy. The agency also ordered the company to designate compliance officers to oversee a privacy program, undergo regular privacy audits that Mr. Zuckerberg and others must submit to, and appoint an outside assessor to monitor the handling of data.
During the discussions about the settlement with Facebook, one point of contention among the F.T.C. commissioners was whether it should shield Mr. Zuckerberg; Facebook’s chief operating officer, Sheryl Sandberg; and other Facebook executives and directors from any personal liability for the company’s transgressions. The Democratic commissioners argued the violations warranted holding the executives personally liable, while the Republican commissioners said new oversight would reduce the ability of Mr. Zuckerberg and others to make unilateral decisions.
The Democratic commissioners also said that Facebook’s financial gains for violating its previous privacy commitments to the F.T.C. would far surpass the $5 billion fine that the agency was imposing.
“When companies can violate the law, pay big penalties and still turn a profit while keeping their business model intact, enforcement agencies cannot claim victory,” Mr. Chopra said in his dissent.
