The Legislature needs to ban campaign contributions from contractors.
What’s worse? That Gov. Andrew Cuomo has accepted millions of dollars in campaign contributions from people who win or seek contracts from New York state agencies — or that his practice is perfectly legal?
It may seem like a tough call, but we’ll go with the latter, since the same practice is considered acceptable by other elected New York state officials as well. It all needs to change.
The Times reported on Monday that since Mr. Cuomo became governor in 2011, he has accepted more than $3 million in campaign contributions from contractors and industry groups affiliated with the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which runs the city’s subways and buses and suburban rail lines. He has raised a total of $88 million in that time. Mass transit unions, which negotiate with the Cuomo administration over labor contracts, have also donated to the governor’s campaigns.
One company, Haugland Group, held a fund-raiser for Mr. Cuomo in 2018, generating roughly $200,000 only months after Haugland won a $23 million contract with the authority to clean clogged drains in the subway system.
Welkin Mechanical, a second company that worked to clear the drains, won a nearly $15 million contract weeks after donating to Mr. Cuomo’s campaign. Mr. Cuomo argues that the bidding process for contracts is overwhelmingly conducted by civil servants. Major contracts, though, are reviewed by the authority’s board.
The Times’s reporting on the agency points to a broader problem: In New York, not only the governor but also legislators and other elected officials are free to take donations from people courting them for the public’s business, a practice that over the years has not exactly enhanced the integrity or efficiency of the state government. In the past decade, a former state comptroller, Assembly speaker and Senate majority leader have all been sentenced to prison in “pay for play” scandals.
More than a dozen other states have laws that restrict candidates from receiving political contributions from companies doing business with or seeking business with the state. Mr. Cuomo himself agrees that New York should join their ranks. He’s been pressing for such legislation since he became governor. “I’ve wanted to get this legislation passed,” Mr. Cuomo said on Monday.
The State Senate passed a bill this year to limit similar donations. The Legislature should pass it when it comes back in session in January.
A key element of any legislation, of course, will be the rules defining the prohibited campaign contributions. In Nebraska, for example, a contractor isn’t allowed to make a donation while a contract is in effect and three years after. In Illinois, the post-contract ban lasts for two years.
As Mr. Cuomo argues, new limits on contributions must include Assembly and Senate candidates. Such measures should include the state attorney general and comptroller as well. While Albany could adopt such rules through legislation, the state public financing commission, already underway, should also address them under its mandate.
Mr. Cuomo doesn’t need to wait for new rules to do the right thing. He can pledge now that he will no longer accept campaign contributions from people and companies with business before the state and be specific about the kinds of donors he means. State legislators, led by the Senate majority leader, Andrea Stewart-Cousins, and the Assembly speaker, Carl Heastie, could make the same commitment.
The governor has been outspoken about the transportation authority’s need to negotiate better deals with its contractors. He has proposed sweeping changes to the way it functions, saying they are necessary to reduce costs and improve efficiency. One plan he backed, which was adopted by the authority’s board last week, calls for consolidating procurement and construction work for contractors. These changes could save the agency $500 million each year but could also cost some 2,700 jobs.
In May, Mr. Cuomo accused transit workers of abusing the overtime system, provoking the ire of unions. “This is about stealing. This is about fraud,” he said at the time.
Inflated construction contracts are substantial drivers of the high cost of agency projects. The project to connect the Long Island Rail Road with Manhattan’s East Side, for example, cost $3.5 billion per mile of track. Generous labor union contracts have also contributed to high costs.
Mr. Cuomo is asking for tough changes at the authority. And he is right that the authority, with bureaucracy to rival the Kremlin, is in need of major reform. But driving major change requires not just forcefulness but also credibility and trust. The governor should consider making a public commitment not to accept donations from companies and people who have business before the state. The public financing commission and the Legislature should put clear limits on these donations into law.