On Aug. 9, 1969, the actress Sharon Tate and four others were slain in a Benedict Canyon home belonging to Tate and her husband, the director Roman Polanski.
A maid called the police at 9 a.m. on Aug. 9, 1969, after finding five dead people in a Beverly Hills home. There was a blond woman on the living room floor, a rope wrapped around her neck and stab wounds in her swollen belly. A bloodied corpse wore a hood; another was behind the wheel of a car. Two more were sprawled on the lawn about 50 feet apart. A neighbor recalled hearing shots around midnight.
The word “pig” was wiped in blood on a white front door.
Charles Manson, an ex-convict turned cult leader, had planned the attack, directing his followers to sneak into a Benedict Canyon home rented by the director Roman Polanski, where they killed his pregnant wife, Sharon Tate, and four guests before dawn.
Americans have long had an insatiable appetite for gruesome crime stories. But this inexplicable act left many in Hollywood panicked that they could be next.
Some celebrities bought handguns to protect themselves. Others installed security cameras or holed up at the Beverly Hills Hotel. For many, the killings exposed the network of hustlers and hangers-on who lurk in the shadows of Los Angeles, barely within grasp of celebrity culture and the desire that fuels it.
“The murders brought into focus several life cycles — disparate but connected — that displayed some of the glamour and intrigue that have long fed the Hollywood script mill,” The New York Times reported.
Adding to the curiosity was the fact that Polanski had directed “Rosemary’s Baby,” the 1968 classic about a satanic cult that tricks a woman into birthing the devil’s child. Tate, for her part, was best known for her role in 1967’s “Valley of the Dolls” as Jennifer North, a beauty with limited acting ability who dies of a drug overdose.
Even today, the murders remain a subject of morbid fascination. In July, the director Quentin Tarantino will release “Once Upon a Time … in Hollywood,” a Technicolor pastiche that explores Los Angeles in 1969 through the fictional friendship of a has-been actor (Leonardo DiCaprio) and his stuntman (Brad Pitt) who live next door to Polanski and Tate.
The married couple were described then as members of a new Hollywood elite — international, stylishly restless and lacking the deep ties to Los Angeles of their more established peers. A Times article published weeks after the murders noted that the couple and their entourage had been said to prefer renting homes instead of buying them. They bounded among London, Paris, New York and Los Angeles, where uninhibited sex and drugs were parcel to the hippie California vibe in the 1960s.
“The impermanence makes for an edginess, an urgency, an unreality — or more precisely, for an almost involuntary detachment from the ongoing concerns which move and occupy most mortals,” Charles Champlin, a Los Angeles Times critic, told The New York Times.
Polanski was born in Paris in 1933, but returned to his parents’ native Poland when he was a toddler. He made a number of films before moving to the United States in 1968, fostering friendships with Polish and French expats in Los Angeles. That year, Polanski married Tate in London after the couple met on the set of a movie he directed in Italy.
Lawyers contended at the time that Manson had commanded his followers to go to the home to kill Melcher after he was spurned. But Melcher had already moved out, and Manson ordered the death of the inhabitants anyway. The next day, members of the cult killed two more people, the grocer Leno LaBianca and his wife, Rosemary.
As news of the murders spread from the seaside bungalows in Venice to the hillside estates above Sunset Boulevard, panic set in. The author Joan Didion wrote in “The White Album,” her 1979 book of essays, “Many people I know in Los Angeles believe that the Sixties ended abruptly on August 9, 1969.” Even the house in Benedict Canyon didn’t last. It was demolished in 1994.
Indeed, the murders spawned copycats. In February 1970, Capt. Jeffrey R. MacDonald, an Army medical field officer with the Green Berets at Fort Bragg in North Carolina, told the police that three men and a blond woman had entered his house, screamed “Acid is groovy, kill the pigs,” and killed his wife and two young daughters.
Like Tate, his wife was pregnant and was stabbed in the stomach. In 1979, a jury convicted Captain MacDonald of the crime, saying he had been inspired after reading an Esquire magazine article about the Tate murder.
A New York Times headline from May 1970.
Back in Los Angeles, a string of violent crimes kept the city on edge. In May 1970, the police arrested five men who had stored 250 weapons and charged them with plotting to assassinate a Superior Court judge.
Later that year, the crew and cast for “The Last Picture Show,” a movie starring Jeff Bridges and Cybill Shepherd about two teenagers growing up in the early 1950s, moved to Archer City, Tex., to begin filming. A Dec. 14 Times article noted that the townspeople didn’t know much about making a movie. But everyone knew Sharon Tate.
