During my summer and winter breaks from college, I worked at Anderson’s Bookshop in Naperville, Ill. This was in the early 2000s, when the store was run by the fifth generation of the Anderson family. The business had existed for over a century before my arrival, though it wasn’t always a bookstore: Founded as W.W. Wickel Pharmacy in 1875, it originally included books and toys among its wares. The family then opened Paperback Paradise, dedicated solely to books, above the drugstore in 1964, and since then, what’s known today as Anderson’s has moved and expanded multiple times.
Arcadia Publishing — through series like Images of America and Postcard History — aims to reconnect “people to their community, their neighbors and their past by offering a curbside view of hometown history.” Their slogan, “Find Your Place in History,” plays out across the 15,000 titles in print, written by geeky enthusiasts whose qualifications tend to arise largely from their residence in the places in question. There’s at least one title on every single one of America’s 50 states, and each title follows a similar formula: an introduction consisting of a casserole of minutiae rather than any overarching argument, followed by an unexpectedly moving series of photo-packed chapters that feature quotidian people engaging in all the banal activities that compose a life.
The books risk being pretty boring, committed as they are to weaving together all the dull and shiny little threads that constitute history in these communities. But that’s what I like about them: While many places bid for historical significance by linking their stories to larger national narratives (George Washington slept here!) or engaging in the boosterish lionization of native-born luminaries, Arcadia usually takes a more granular and idiosyncratic approach. I recently became reacquainted with the series while doing research for a new novel; I sought the kind of lived-in texture and worm’s-eye-view detail that imparts a sense of what inhabiting a place might really have been like. The Arcadia vibe is more grandmother’s attic than Smithsonian Institution, more library lecture than college class. Reading its books feels agreeably like being buttonholed by a neighborhood expert bent on convincing you that the town is vastly more interesting than you’d ever imagined.
The series show that history, rather than being committed by distant heroes and warehoused in textbooks, is lived by normal people — always happening on every street, on every block, in every yard, all the time. They give the same credibility to a place like Naperville as they would to New York or Boston, making all of history — not just the famous parts — accessible and scintillating. Read “Litchfield” and learn that the Connecticut town used to have a Whipping Post Elm for public floggings, which “attained a circumference of 150 inches before it died at age 200”; read “Boonsboro” and learn that the first macadam road surface in the United States was installed between it and Hagerstown, Md., in 1823; read “Pigeon Forge” and learn that the resort community in Tennessee is so named because it’s on the Little Pigeon River, which used to power an iron forge there. The esotericism is what makes it work — it feels as if you’re being pulled in to a conversation around a family dinner table.
I went to high school in a little Illinois town called Downers Grove, which, as cynical teenagers, we joked, really was quite a downer. But in “Downers Grove Revisited,” I learned that the Tivoli Theater (attached to the Tivoli lanes, where we learned to bowl in gym class) was built in 1928 and was the second theater in the United States to be designed for talking pictures. It made the town shine with a little vanished glamour. Flipping through the book, I gazed into the eyes of the members of the Downers Grove basketball team of 1920, and the gentle ghostliness of the entire series — so riddled with the lost — hit home; I stared into the faces of the dead, sitting in a place which, even still, is so alive for me.