WASHINGTON — A federal judge on Tuesday ordered President Trump’s former adviser Roger J. Stone Jr. off major social media platforms, declaring that he violated a gag order by using them to attack the special counsel’s investigation and officials tied to it.
Mr. Stone, a longtime friend of Mr. Trump and a self-described dirty trickster, had been barred from commenting on his criminal case or the Russia investigation that spawned it while he awaits trial. But Judge Amy Berman Jackson of the United States District Court in Washington said he had repeatedly and deliberately flouted her order, forcing her to broaden it.
Mr. Stone is charged with obstruction of justice, witness tampering and lying to congressional investigators in an indictment secured by the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III. Investigators were scrutinizing Mr. Stone’s attempts during the 2016 presidential election to communicate with WikiLeaks about the release of Democratic emails that had been stolen by Russian operatives.
After she gave him a second chance, the judge said, Mr. Stone repeatedly took to Instagram to try to “gin up more public comment and controversy” about the Mueller inquiry, a related House committee investigation and his own prosecution.
She suggested that he or his lawyers were trying to manipulate the legal process to keep Mr. Stone in the public limelight. She also said they had misled her about the date of publication of his book, “The Myth of Russian Collusion: The Inside Story of How Donald Trump REALLY Won,” possibly to sell more copies.
Mr. Stone was banned from Twitter in late 2017 for incendiary posts. But he is a prolific user of Instagram, where he has more than 50,000 followers and regularly posts with the hashtag #rogerstonedidnothingwrong.
The punishment is an apparent blow to Mr. Stone’s ability to raise money for his defense. Until now, the judge had allowed him to protest his innocence and ask for contributions on social media, as long as he avoided discussing the case or the Russia investigation.
She cited 11 apparent violations of her restrictions since February, three of which she called particularly egregious.
In a June post on Instagram, Mr. Stone referred to John O. Brennan, the former head of the C.I.A., as a “psycho” who should be hanged for treason. Mr. Brennan approved an intelligence assessment of Russia’s interference in the election that may be presented as evidence in Mr. Stone’s trial.
In a March post, Mr. Stone mocked Representative Adam B. Schiff, Democrat of California and the head of the House Intelligence Committee, as “a con man.” Mr. Stone’s criminal case is based on accusations that he lied to that committee when he testified about WikiLeaks contacts and that he tried to persuade an associate to back up his false testimony.
In a third instance, Mr. Stone attacked Michael D. Cohen, President Trump’s former lawyer and fixer. He claimed that Mr. Cohen had lied to Congress about what Mr. Stone had told him about his WikiLeaks connections.
Mr. Stone’s lawyer, Bruce S. Rogow, argued that none of those actions were likely to prejudice a jury pool, and that some of Mr. Stone’s posts had generated just a few hundred likes. He acknowledged that he himself had suggested the parameters of Judge Jackson’s February gag order, but argued that she should now lift it.
The judge dismissed his arguments, saying he had to “twist the facts, twist the plain meaning of the order and twist himself into a pretzel” to claim that Mr. Stone had not violated it.
Jonathan Kravis, an assistant United States attorney, had asked the judge to at a minimum clarify her order and to at least consider broadening it.
“No matter how clear a line the court draws, the defendant will cross it and then will come to court and argue that he can’t be held responsible because there was some ambiguity when in fact there was no ambiguity,” he said.
The case against Mr. Stone has raised lingering questions about whether federal investigators were able to fully explore the Trump campaign’s contacts with WikiLeaks, or were stymied by witnesses like Mr. Stone who may have lied or refused to cooperate. The Trump campaign was eager for WikiLeaks to publish stolen emails from Hillary Clinton’s campaign chairman and from Democratic political organizations, but was never implicated in the theft of the documents by Russian operatives.
Mr. Stone is accused of lying to the House committee in September 2017 about his efforts to obtain information from Julian Assange, the founder of WikiLeaks, and about his communications with the Trump campaign about WikiLeaks. He is also accused of telling an associate not to cooperate with the committee.
