The Cuban autocracy remains a nagging reminder of United States impotence in rooting out Communism.
Mr. Sabatini is an expert in Latin America’s politics.
The Trump administration’s effort to bring about the end of Cuba’s repressive government by squeezing the island’s economy promises only more suffering for Cuban citizens, who are already struggling under Fidel Castro’s failed economic project.
The White House is hurting the very people — ordinary Cubans — it claims to support. Not only are their potential sources of independent income (and, with it, political independence) drying up, so is their access to food — and their hopes for the future.
For decades, the Cuban autocracy has been a nagging reminder of United States impotence in rooting out Communism. Washington’s embargo on Havana was tightened by Congress in 1992 and 1996 — with the unintentionally ironic titles of the Cuban Democracy Act and what’s known as the Cuban Liberty Act.
This pressure has always come with tough talk from Republicans, who like to claim that the Castro government’s time is up. John Bolton, the national security adviser, is the latest hawk to spew this empty rhetoric.
Yet more than 58 years of isolating Havana has shown that the strategy doesn’t follow any logical theory of regime change, even if it plays well in South Florida. Isolation has only reinforced the Cuban government’s effort to make its citizens economically dependent on the Communist state.
There was a brief break in America’s hard-line approach when, in December 2014, President Barack Obama announced a loosening of the embargo and the normalization of relations. President Trump reversed course and rolled out many of the past, failed sanctions against Cuba, plus some new ones.
Those have included restricting Americans’ travel to officially approved group trips with cultural organizations, ending the allowance for American cruise ships to dock in Cuban ports, plans to reduce to $1,000 the amount of money that Cuban-Americans can send to Cuba every three months, and allowing United States citizens to sue foreign companies over the use of property expropriated by the Castro government (a provision suspended by Republican and Democratic administrations since it was passed in 1996).
By the White House’s own admission, these policies will reduce by half the number of American tourists visiting the island. That number last year was 600,000. American tourists had been helping to support the private restaurants, shops and the approximately 20,000 Airbnb’s that have sprung up in recent years.
Support for Havana from the regime in Venezuela, another target of the Trump administration, has been halted, compounding Cuba’s economic troubles.
Shortly after he was inaugurated as president of Venezuela in 1999, Hugo Chávez, threw the struggling Cuban economy a lifeline, sending 100,000 barrels of oil a day, half of which the Cuban government sold on the world market for hard currency. As partial payment for the cheap oil, Cubans provided intelligence and military support to Mr. Chávez and to his successor, Nicolás Maduro, to help them consolidate their corrupt, autocratic project.
But as Venezuelan oil production plunged in recent years, and global prices fell, Cuba’s life-support system dried up to between 20,000 and 50,000 barrels per day, as of April.
The Trump administration has seen the weakness of these two economies as an opportunity to push for regime change in both countries.
The first target was Mr. Maduro, hoping his fall would bring democracy to his country and thus bankrupt the Cuban regime, finally bringing it to its knees. Now, as administration officials face their failed, overhyped efforts to topple Mr. Maduro, they have changed their focus: they are blaming Cuba for Mr. Maduro’s survival — rather than Mr. Maduro for the Cuban government’s survival.
Cubans — and the Cuban leaders — have been through worse. American restrictions on trade and travel to Cuba are minor compared to the difficulties they faced after the collapse of the Soviet Union, during which the Cuban economy contracted by more than one third. Even then, with food, electricity and hope all in short supply, the Castro government survived.
Today, Cuba’s leadership, under Raúl Castro’s handpicked successor, Miguel Díaz-Canel, is once again rallying the island nation’s citizens to tighten their belts, for example by promoting hutia, a local rodent, as a source of protein. And other authoritarian powers, like China and Russia, are more than willing to throw even just a bit of economic help, and lots of anti-American ideological support, which didn’t exist during the post-Cold War period.
The Trump administration’s strategy will fail, as it has in the past, and ordinary Cuban citizens will continue to bare the brunt of a misguided American policy. When will American leaders finally learn the lessons of history?
Christopher Sabatini, a lecturer at Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs and a nonresident fellow at Rice University’s Baker Institute, is executive director of Global Americans, a think tank.