Call him racist, call him sexist, just don’t call him late for dinner.
Maybe we should stop talking about Donald Trump being a racist. He seems to love the idea too much.
“I think I’m winning,” he told reporters as he left for a rally on Wednesday.
That would, in one case, have been Cincinnati. But the message was that if you were nonwhite, you must be some kind of foreigner. It was pretty clear to a lot of Americans that telling people to go back where they came from was a racist trope. Trump said he didn’t care. And, of course, he didn’t.
It was an echo of the “Lock her up!” chants Trump elicited when he was ranting about Hillary Clinton. Who was a presidential nominee. Omar is a lawmaker who has been in office about six months.
People, if you were genuinely trying to tamp down a crisis over a president’s racist remarks about minority members of Congress, would you use the term “dark underbelly”? And are you surprised Kellyanne Conway is still around? Trump cannot hang onto a cabinet member for more than five minutes, but she’s apparently got lifetime tenure.
Which did Conway do in her official capacity as presidential spokesperson?
O.K., I know you all got that one right. It was just a diversion.
The squad is not actually a group, but they share a generally left worldview. Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez of New York talks a lot about socialism. Omar and Rashida Tlaib of Michigan have both been very critical of Israel. Ayanna Pressley of Massachusetts wants to defund ICE. Now Trump is eager to run against them instead of the actual Democratic Party.
And, of course, throwing in a lot of immigrant-bashing is just fine. You may conceivably remember that he got elected on a send-them-back-where-they-came-from campaign.
Let’s stop for just a second and think about Lindsey Graham. He was once known as John McCain’s loyal senatorial spaniel, and if that wasn’t a great image, at least he was picking a pretty good idol to follow panting behind. Now that McCain is gone, Graham seems to have latched onto Trump, which is sort of like a lonely teenager who used to pal around with the class rebel switching allegiance to the guy who steals tires off cars in the handicapped parking lot.
Other minions were less hysterical in their defensiveness, although no more charming. “I think we’re going way beyond the pale right now. They talk about people of color. I’m a person of color. I’m white. I’m an Anglo-Saxon,” said Representative Mike Kelly of Pennsylvania.
That would be Secretary of Transportation Elaine Chao, whose family has a huge shipping business and is now the wife of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell.
Otherwise, the Trump cabinet is virtually minority-free except for, my God, Ben Carson. Alex Acosta, the labor secretary, had to ditch his job after the world learned of his unhelpful prosecutorial role in the Jeffrey Epstein scandal.
Is that all completely clear? Acosta was, by virtually anybody’s standard, a terrible labor secretary. But he’s welcome to move right over to a cushy job in the private sector. Certainly nobody wants him to go back to wherever he came from.