Real Estate|My Building Has Been Shrouded in Scaffolding for Months. What Can I Do?
My Building Has Been Shrouded in Scaffolding for Months. What Can I Do?
Scaffolding is considered a public safety measure, so courts are largely unsympathetic to quality-of-life complaints. But there is hope.
Q: I live on the second floor of a West Village co-op. For 18 months, the building has been covered in scaffolding to comply with city rules, although the board has not updated shareholders about what’s going on. In the meantime, I have lived without privacy, quiet or daylight because the scaffolding platform is directly outside my window. Most distressing is the constant dust, which makes me sneeze and my eyes itch. What recourse do I have?
A: In New York, all buildings taller than six stories must have their facades inspected every five years. The city Local Law 11 is designed to prevent pedestrians from being struck by falling debris, which has happened over the years, with tragic consequences.
If the inspection uncovers safety hazards like cracks or loose bricks, the scaffolding must remain in place until the facade is repaired, which could take months or years. The Department of Buildings levies heavy fines against properties that do not comply with the rules. To better understand the co-op’s structural issues, enter your address in the DOB NOW Public Portal and read your building’s facade inspection report.
Because the scaffolding is considered a public safety measure, the courts are largely unsympathetic to quality-of-life complaints from tenants. While the lack of light and privacy is frustrating, “legal recourse against the board will be a challenge,” said Eric D. Sherman, a real estate lawyer and partner in the Manhattan office of Pryor Cashman. As for the noise, “a certain level of noise is to be expected with construction work,” Mr. Sherman said.
However, the board should address your concerns about dust infiltrating your apartment, irritating your airways and eyes. You are protected by the warranty of habitability, a state rule that requires property owners, including co-op boards, to provide tenants with habitable living conditions. You may be entitled to a reduction in your maintenance fees, but you should first consult a lawyer, Mr. Sherman said.
But first, take some practical measures. Close, lock and, if possible, seal windows near the work site to reduce the dust infiltrating your apartment. Use an air purifier. Review your proprietary lease and bylaws for guidance on building rules. Write the board a letter insisting that it keep dust from entering your home. The board should also speak with the contractor about reducing dust at the site. Insist that the board provide updates about the pace of the work, mentioning that your previous requests have gone unanswered.