Opinion|I Used to Work for Google. I Am a Conscientious Objector.
Public shaming has a mixed track record. In October 2005, five years before being awarded a Nobel Peace Prize, Liu Xiaobo published an open letter to Jerry Yang, the chairman of Yahoo at the time. It was in response to Yahoo’s role in the arrest of the pro-democracy journalist Shi Tao, who had anonymously posted instructions from the Chinese Communist Party insisting that he not report on the 15th anniversary of the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests.
Mr. Liu’s letter said that Yahoo “complied with China’s State Security police by tracing Shi Tao’s internet activity and providing his email account, IP address and other personal information to them. This information became one of the most important pieces of evidence in the conviction of Mr. Shi.” And he further implied that Yahoo’s recently completed deal to purchase 40 percent of Alibaba, the e-commerce giant, was a factor in the decision.
Mr. Liu couldn’t have possibly known that a decade later, Google’s Dragonfly modifications of Search would censor information on his Nobel Prize and reportedly tie Search queries to phone numbers.
Two years after Mr. Liu’s letter, while Shi Tao was serving a 10-year sentence that would ultimately be reduced to eight and a half, Mr. Yang appeared before the House Foreign Affairs Committee. The committee’s chairman, Tom Lantos, berated Mr. Yang’s contention that Yahoo was complying with ordinary law enforcement. “While technologically and financially you are giants, morally you are pygmies,” Mr. Lantos said.
Mr. Yang defended Yahoo’s human rights commitments and emphasized the importance of the Chinese market. Google used a similar defense for Dragonfly last year. Despite negative press received by Google, direct calls from Vice President Mike Pence to end the project and two congressional interrogations of executives, the only major setback to Project Dragonfly came from Google’s privacy team standing up to management.
Collective worker action has been a constant, if unappreciated, check on questionable projects at Google. The trend arguably began when a group of engineers (the “Group of Nine”) prevented the acceptance of an Air Force contract by refusing to build “air gap” technology needed for federal security requirements. This inspired the sustained, and ultimately successful, internal effort to end Google’s work on applying artificial intelligence to Pentagon drone footage for targeting insurgents as part of Project Maven.
The internal turmoil led to the creation of Google’s A.I. Principles, which committed the company to not “design or deploy” technologies that violate “widely accepted principles of international law and human rights.” The combination of Maven’s cancellation and the inability to complete the required federal certifications led to Google’s withdrawal from a $10 billion contract to build the Pentagon’s cloud computing effort called Project JEDI.
The high-water mark of collective action at the company was on Nov. 1, 2018, when 20,000 Google workers collectively walked out of their offices to demand improvements to Google’s policies on sexual harassment. The event was a direct response to a New York Times exposé on Google’s having given Andy Rubin, the “father of Android,” a $90 million payout despite having a verified sexual misconduct claim against him. The action led to public concessions on forced arbitration, not only from Google but across the tech industry.
In Maven and JEDI, internal organizing was a success. The A.I. Principles were drafted and cited as the reason for the cancellations. But even the collective action of key employees on Dragonfly has not led to a public statement that the project would have violated Google’s commitment to not design technologies violating human rights.
Direct action from tech workers has been undeniably effective. Human rights organizations must therefore continue to advocate the legal protection of whistle-blowers and conscientious objectors, including protecting the organizing required for an effective collective action. Further, the broader civil society could increase the frequency of whistle-blowing by creating a dedicated legal defense fund.
Tech companies are spending record amounts on lobbying and quietly fighting to limit employees’ legal protections for organizing. North American legislators would be wise to answer the call from human rights organizations and research institutions by guaranteeing explicit whistle-blower protections similar to those recently passed by the European Union. Ideally, they would vocally support an instrument that legally binds businesses — via international human rights law — to uphold human rights.
If it is morally defensible, tech companies should have nothing to fear from discussions of the human rights implications of their work, whether that discussion happens in the boardroom or public square.
Jack Poulson is the founder of Tech Inquiry. He was previously on the mathematics faculty at Stanford.
