It’s Wednesday. There was a small earthquake off the coast of Long Island yesterday morning.
Weather: Today will be cool, sunny and breezy — the way that I always want it to be. Temperatures are expected to top out in the high 50s around 4 p.m.
Alternate-side parking: In effect until April 18 (Holy Thursday).
New York City is experiencing one of the largest measles outbreaks in the United States in decades, with 285 confirmed cases since the fall, mainly in ultra-Orthodox Jewish communities in Brooklyn.
On Tuesday, city officials declared a public health emergency, requiring people in four ZIP codes in Brooklyn to get vaccinated or face penalties.
The city declared a public health emergency. Now what?
The city is focusing on four ZIP codes in Williamsburg and Borough Park, Brooklyn: 11205, 11206, 11211 and 11249.
• Get vaccinated.
• Prove that they already were vaccinated.
• Pay a fine of $1,000 for each time they were exposed to the disease.
How will the city know if someone was in contact with a person who has measles?
That’s the job of disease detectives. No, seriously: That’s what they’re called.
Disease detectives figure out who is sick, when they became sick and how they might have gotten sick, according to the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. This information helps doctors and health officials trace the source of an outbreak and ultimately contain it.
Will the city vaccinate people against their will?
“We will not be forcibly vaccinating individuals,” a City Hall spokeswoman, Marcy Miranda, wrote in an email to The Times. Officials “will work with people to educate them about the safety and importance of vaccines and will issue necessary fines as needed,” she wrote.
Why is measles spreading? Wasn’t it eradicated?
Years ago, the number of confirmed measles cases in the United States dropped to a very low point, but the virus was never eliminated.
In 2000, there were no reported cases of the disease in the United States. In 2004, there were 37 confirmed cases in the country. In 2014, that number jumped to 667, according to the C.D.C.
In recent years, vaccination rates worldwide fell, largely because of misinformation about the dangers of vaccinations.
To be clear: Vaccines are safe, and not getting vaccinated enables the disease to spread.
What have other places done to stop measles outbreaks?
Rockland County, a suburban area north of the city, tried banning unvaccinated individuals from public spaces, restaurants, shopping areas and houses of worship last month.
A judge recently halted the policy.
A New York City firefighter went to serve in Afghanistan. He was killed by a roadside bomb.
“Jane Doe Ponytail” died in New York. Now her brother is taking her home to China.
Bob Slade, a distinguished voice on black radio, has died. He was 70.
Two women were killed on a beach vacation in 1973. A DNA test just led to an arrest.
A night at the museum with beer and skulls.
How Gold’s Horseradish became a Passover staple.
Are humans shaping technology, or is technology shaping us?
You may find answers at an exhibit called “Bionic Me,” at the New York Hall of Science in Queens.
There’s an ethics test in which participants record their answers not by filling out a sheet of paper or pressing buttons on a keyboard, but with “eye-motion tracking technology,” said Lauren Parikhal, a marketing and communications manager at the Hall of Science.
There is also an exoskeleton that children can climb into and, with a little help from a computer screen, act “as if they were a superhuman-strong robot on a factory floor,” she said.

The goal is to get the ball to hover higher than your opponent’s. To get the ball to hover higher in the tube, you have to lower your brain wave activity.
“Bionic Me” is open until May 5.
Admission to the Hall of Science is $16 for adults, $13 for children and seniors.
It’s Wednesday — let your geek flag fly.
I am an inveterate jogger. Once, when I was out for a run on a Wednesday night in 1979, I had a memorable meeting with a motorist in distress at the northbound 96th Street exit off the F.D.R. Drive.
I had run up that way from my apartment in Stuyvesant Town on East 20th Street.
I was about to turn around at 96th Street and head back south when I saw a driver stopped at the side of the road in a way that suggested car trouble. It was my sister. She worked on the West Side then and commuted from Westchester County.
Adding to the magic of the coincidence was that even though I have never been mechanically inclined, I was able to make a temporary repair that got her back on the road.
The problem was a disconnected exhaust pipe. I asked my sister to give me her stockings. Then I shimmied under the car and used them to tie the pipe to the chassis.
In about five minutes, we were on our way: she to Westchester, and me back to 20th Street.
