Many see Tuesday’s election as a referendum on Benjamin Netanyahu, who has been prime minister for the last decade and is facing likely indictment for fraud.
Is Israel ready for a changing of the guard?
The outcome of Tuesday’s parliamentary election will determine whether Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu and his Likud party will continue to lead the country.
Mr. Netanyahu, who has been embroiled by corruption allegations, continues to be seen by many Israeli Jews as critical to their country’s future security. But he’s facing a strong challenge from the newly formed Blue and White party, led by the former military chief Benny Gantz.
Israel uses a parliamentary system in which many parties jockey for votes. Even if Mr. Netanyahu’s Likud wins fewer seats than Mr. Gantz’s party, he may be better positioned to form a governing coalition by working with conservative parties.
We asked Israeli citizens how they plan to vote and which issues matter most to them. Though we sought feedback from citizens of all backgrounds, and reached out in English and Arabic, our 200 responses were overwhelmingly from Jews, perhaps because many of Israel’s nearly two million Arab citizens plan to boycott the election.
Many said they had chosen Likud or Blue and White, and listed the conflict between Israel and the Palestinians among their chief concerns.
Others said they were more focused on the economy and social issues such as L.G.B.T. rights, saying they would vote for parties like the New Right, the center-right party Kulanu or the left-wing secular party Meretz. Below are some of their responses, which have been condensed and edited.
If you’re an Israeli citizen, which party will you vote for? Tell us in the comments.
Peace with the Palestinians has remained elusive during Mr. Netanyahu’s time as prime minister. Violence has surged in the West Bank at times, there were wars with Islamic militants in Gaza in 2012 and 2014, and recent clashes between Israel and Hamas along the Gaza border have been deadly.
Palestinians in the West Bank, Gaza and East Jerusalem are not Israeli citizens and cannot vote on Tuesday.
I am voting for the New Right, Naftali Bennett’s party, because I am in favor of the annexation of the territories Judea and Samaria and the West Bank so as to apply Israeli law to all who live there.
I am a Jew of Arab and European descent who moved to Israel almost seven years ago. Although I do not live in the territories, I work there. I’m looking forward to fewer checkpoints, the application of environmental regulations (the burning garbage, pollution and contamination there are horrific) and better relations among different demographic populations.
Gantz takes a more sober, realistic approach to the conflict with the Palestinians. His background as the Israel Defense Forces chief of staff certainly helps, but he seems to grasp the more diplomatic aspects of being a head of state as well.
He advocates smaller steps that could improve lives on all sides while keeping in mind the ultimate goal of two states, without simply paying lip service to a lofty ideal.
I’m boycotting the election.
As a Palestinian citizen of Israel, I have no reason to be optimistic about my future in the country. If by simply exercising my basic democratic right to vote, I am posing a threat to Israel’s political order, as Netanyahu has constantly hinted, then I can only imagine where my struggle for equal rights stands right now.
What’s more, Arabs will have no say in the new government, regardless of who wins. All major party (Jewish) leaders said they will not invite Arab parties to join a government coalition. That explains why many Arabs are boycotting, with reasons ranging from racism and discrimination to lack of faith in both Arab parties and Israel’s democracy.
I am Jewish. The Arab citizens in Israel are the weakest in our society. The minimum I can do for them is to give my vote to an Arab party: Hadash.
In February, Israel’s attorney general announced plans to indict Mr. Netanyahu, often called Bibi, on charges of bribery, fraud and breach of trust after an investigation of more than two years. Mr. Netanyahu has denied the allegations and characterized them as a partisan witch hunt.
I live in northern Israel and support Likud. Besides their foreign relations successes, Likud and Netanyahu have led impressive growth in the economy that has benefited my family, along with most families in Israel.
The allegations against Netanyahu are serious but have been way overblown by the media. Likud has a deep bench of experienced leaders who can certainly hold the reins if Netanyahu is sidelined.
I plan on voting for Benny Gantz.
Netanyahu has been in power too long. He has done great work and will undoubtedly be remembered as one of Israel’s top prime ministers and central to Israel’s emergence as an economic powerhouse and regional power, but power corrupts. Whether or not the allegations about Netanyahu are true, he has held the reins too long and become obsessed with holding on as long as possible, rather than putting the country’s needs first.
Netanyahu cares so deeply about Israel. In a time where we feel like the world despises our every move, we need him to remain in office.
I obviously don’t approve of his scandals, but I love him as our prime minister.
Israel’s economy and tech sector have grown steadily under Mr. Netanyahu, and in a poll of likely voters taken a month before the election, almost half said economic issues were most important to them.
I plan on voting “Not Netanyahu.” He has had four rounds, and with each passing year it becomes clear that his main interest is lining his pockets.
I am primarily concerned about the financial and social issues that affect my family. The cost of living is too high, especially in Jerusalem, and one day I would like to be able to afford to buy rather than rent. As a single mother, it is sometimes difficult to imagine thriving financially, rather than just surviving.
I will be voting for Kulanu because its focus is not only on security, but more important on issues that face Israel every day, such as rising costs and breaking monopolies.
While gay rights have garnered wide support in Israel, the ultra-Orthodox, who are part of Mr. Netanyahu’s governing coalition, have resisted laws protecting same-sex couples. Last summer Israelis demonstrated against the rejection of an amendment that would have allowed gay men to father children through surrogates.
Meretz is wholeheartedly against the continued occupation and fights for human rights and the L.G.B.T. cause.
Out of three siblings, two of us are L.G.B.T. and we fear the ultra right-wing party’s rise to power if Netanyahu wins. We can see and hear how L.G.B.T.-phobia is less harshly received. We hear how the politicians talk about our rights and fear how they will act once sworn in.
Meretz is the only party really sticking to its ideology: Zionist socialism. It has a tremendous Parliament record, despite its small size. It also has an impressive roster that represents all the different segments of our society.
I am queer and hope to finally get equal rights. I want our culture to be more accepting of others.
Settlements created by Israelis in occupied territories are considered illegal under international law. Mr. Netanyahu made a re-election campaign promise to annex parts of the occupied West Bank, which Palestinians have said could end the possibility of a two-state peace agreement and lead to renewed violence.
I think Blue and White is the only party that can get rid of Netanyahu.
But I hope that whoever gets to build the government will see that the right way for Israel is to begin the de-occupation of the West Bank and to recognize the state of Palestine.
The fate of the Israeli settlements, however, is a different story. I guess that with serious negotiations it is completely possible to leave some settlements and to evacuate more isolated ones.
I am voting for the United Right party. We need a stronger Jewish state of Israel.
I hope Israel will annex the West Bank. If the left wins, my family could be thrown out of our home and rockets could reach us. We are Americans who moved here for religious reasons and our love of Israel.
I will vote for Raam-Balad because I support the Palestinians’ right to be free of Zionist colonization.
No party has ever won 61 seats in Israel’s 120-seat Parliament, the number necessary to form a government. Instead, after elections, parties try to create coalitions in order to control a majority of the seats.
Mr. Netanyahu’s conservative Likud party currently leads a right-wing and religious coalition.
I hope for a coalition that includes the big secular parties (Likud, Blue-and-White, Labor) and perhaps Kulanu or even Meretz, and no religious parties.
If Netanyahu becomes the prime minister and forms a coalition with the secular parties, then this is the best scenario. We can expect some economic and social reforms, such as finally allowing public transportation on Saturday and civil marriages (especially for L.G.B.T. people and for non-Jews).
I have reservations about Avi Gabbay, the Labor Party chairman, but Labor remains the most likely and most ideologically reliable coalition partner for a future Gantz-led government.
In July, Mr. Netanyahu’s governing right-wing coalition passed legislation declaring Israel the “nation-state of the Jewish people.” Leftists and centrists have condemned the law, characterizing it as anti-democratic, racist and divisive.
I plan to vote for Blue and White.
I am a Druze, and my family used to be right wing — basically the Likud party. But as a non-Jewish minority, we feel more disconnected from the Jewish democratic state of Israel after the nationality law pushed by Likud.
To me, Blue and White represents a return to dignity and honor on the political path. It’s sorely needed — a sense that we Israelis are all in this together, that life is not a sad, zero-sum game.