Berenice Abbott captured the egomania and wanton development of New York’s streetscapes almost a century ago. The city is still at it.
A generation before Kouwenhoven, Berenice Abbott captured this heathen beauty in a portfolio of photographs she called “Changing New York,” which was exhibited at the Museum of the City of New York in 1937. Her city is not a nesting ground for the people who lived there but a rivalry of individual egos craning to fill the horizon with their concrete and glass. If people live there, it is only because the buildings have not yet had time to crowd them out.
Abbott was born in Springfield, Ohio, in 1898, and lived briefly in New York before moving to Paris in 1921, where she built a reputation for her disquieting portraits, often of members of the avant-garde. When she returned to New York in 1929, at the start of the Great Depression, she was struck by the rate of change in the city. Then as now, real estate ate territory like an invasive species, vaulting upward and outward in bullying disarray.
But as Kouwenhoven noted, what beautiful disarray.
Abbott turned her focus to the architectural flux. The Chrysler Building and the Empire State Building, both started before the Depression, were brand-new. Charlie Chaplin’s 1936 film “Modern Times,” which captured the fear of uniformity and automation, was in theaters. Progress was both thrilling and scary.
Abbott’s photos take the grid out of the grid. Symmetries give way to random architectural jostling. Buildings seem to be leaning on or over one another, slicing off at odd angles. It’s an unstable cityscape because it’s still growing, indifferent to the comforts of the people below. When she shows the alternative, open space, it is lonely and desolate. Her overcrowded scenes, by contrast, are valentines to a metropolis that doesn’t need people, and doesn’t invite anyone to call home. Growth is all. Get big or get out.
Many of these photos of the city are collected in a new book “Berenice Abbott: Portraits of Modernity,” from Fundación Mapfre.
That a later era of wanton growth, our own, would tempt the entire world to want to live here, while pricing it obscenely out of reach, is a possibility not imagined in these photographs.
Follow @nytimesphoto and @johnleland on Twitter. You can also find us on Facebook and Instagram.