When martial law was imposed in Poland in 1981, The Times’s Warsaw bureau chief, John Darnton, filed his copy however he could — including via middlemen, in cigarette boxes and in cowboy boots.
Some time after martial law was imposed in Poland in December 1981, John Darnton folded a draft of an article he had just written inside an empty box of Marlboro cigarettes.
Mr. Darnton served as The Times’s Warsaw bureau chief from 1979 to 1981; it was a precarious time for Poles, as a Soviet-backed regime tried to tighten its grip on the nation.
The unyielding Times reporter — who had been expelled from Nigeria by anti-democratic forces just two years earlier — was determined to stay in his post this time, and to tell the world about the oppression that was unfolding in the Soviet-bloc nation.
He handed the cigarette box off to a lay traveler who had agreed to carry it back to the United States.
The article was published in The Times just days later.
Unwavering commitment to the journalistic cause, even against a dangerous backdrop, was in Mr. Darnton’s DNA. He was just 11 months old when his father Byron (Barney) Darnton, a war correspondent for The New York Times, was killed while reporting in what is now Papua New Guinea in October 1942.
Following in his father’s footsteps, Mr. Darnton started his career as a copy boy, running a mimeograph machine for the New York Times news syndicate in 1966. He also had stints on the photo and metro desks, and as a foreign correspondent, before arriving in Warsaw in 1979.
The imposition of martial law in Poland, a country already ravaged by the Nazi invasion in 1939, created a host of challenges for everyday Poles. For journalists trying to tell the stories of the Solidarity movement — a free trade union that transformed into a mass movement for liberalization in Poland — the stakes were high and extremely risky.
Mr. Darnton and other Western journalists found ingenious ways to circumvent government censorship and work within the limits of martial law to file articles back home.
Mr. Darnton did not ask the travelers to deliver the copy by hand. Instead, he scribbled the phone number of The New York Times’s foreign desk on the top of each article and asked his carriers to call The Times as soon as they arrived in a Western country. These aides then proceeded to dictate the story, start to finish, including punctuation, to a Times employee on the other end of the phone.
Mr. Darnton does not know which copy of each article made it back to Times headquarters. He was not in touch with anyone outside of Poland for weeks at a time.
The reporter developed a code system with the foreign desk in New York that let him know when each story had been received. He made up a name for each article — Alice or Betsy, for example — and he wrote it at the head of each copy. The foreign desk would send him a telegram later, using that name as proof that the story had reached 43rd Street. “John, I hope all is well. Betsy sends her greetings,” Mr. Darnton paraphrased the telegrams that he received back in Warsaw. “That way I’d know that my second story, Betsy, arrived and was published,” he said.
Once, Mr. Darnton approached a man — “kind of a hippie, with large cowboy boots” — in a hotel lobby. “He agreed and stuffed my story, equal pages in both boots, so he wouldn’t hobble,” he said. That article, too, made it back to Mr. Darnton’s editors.
Surprisingly, Mr. Darnton never felt scared; he found that the “cat-and-mouse game of getting around censors” gave him a frisson of thrill.
Mr. Darnton — who frequently had his car tires slashed by secret police officials on his trail — recalls his most “dramatic” encounter as having taken place on a grim and snowy winter night. He was set to interview a member of the Solidarity movement, the highest-ranking official not yet in custody, who had evaded arrest by moving to different hide-outs.
“He was kind of like the Scarlet Pimpernel,” Mr. Darnton said, referring to the secret life of the protagonist in the novel of the same name, set during the French Revolution.
Mr. Darnton was blindfolded and led to a secret location. But then the interview was abruptly called off: His contacts feared they had been followed. Instead, they allowed Mr. Darnton to submit written questions that would be forwarded to the Polish dissident. So he waited, alone, in a dank apartment building on the wrong side of curfew.
For Mr. Darnton, 77, who serves as the curator of the George Polk Awards and is writing his sixth novel, the Warsaw assignment was among his most fascinating. “It was a laboratory for human behavior: how people reacted when suddenly circumstances changed radically and the rug was pulled out from underneath them,” he said.
He remains cleareyed about the impact of his reporting and what it has meant with the hindsight of history. The news reports “made the Kremlin think twice about invading, and, when fed back into Poland by radio broadcasts, encouraged the Poles in their quest for freedom,” he said.
