Politics|Pete Buttigieg’s Focus: Storytelling First. Policy Details Later.
Pete Buttigieg’s Focus: Storytelling First. Policy Details Later.
The question was simple enough, but Senator John Edwards squirmed painfully. For 49 long seconds, the North Carolina Democrat, a masterful courtroom orator, sputtered before a crowd at Harvard, unable to settle on a favorite movie.
Pete Buttigieg watched in horror.
Two weeks later, in October 2003, Mr. Buttigieg vented his dismay in The Harvard Crimson. Contrasting Mr. Edwards’s hollow presentation with Arnold Schwarzenegger’s brazen campaign for governor of California, Mr. Buttigieg wrote that Republicans had cornered the market on political swagger.
Sixteen years later, that observation informs Mr. Buttigieg’s underdog campaign for the White House, an enterprise driven powerfully by personality. Other candidates have anchored their candidacies in ideological or social causes, like Senator Elizabeth Warren’s opposition to corporate power or Senator Cory Booker’s concern for racial justice.
Mr. Buttigieg’s distinctive political passion appears to be storytelling, wrapping conventional liberalism in an earnest, youthful persona that Democrats might see as capable of winning over the middle of the country.
Pete Buttigieg, the 37-year-old Democratic mayor of South Bend, Ind., has gained surprising early visibility in the 2020 presidential race. 
A millennial mayor with a difficult last name. [Mispronunciations of “Buttigieg.”] And, a knack for languages. [“Good morning, America” in several languages.] Pete Buttigieg is in the race for the White House. “I am running for president of the United States.” So, who is he? Buttigieg, also known as — “Mayor Pete” — is the mayor of South Bend, Ind. He got the job when he was just 29 and quickly moved to reverse the city’s economic decline. “Our hometown is not dead.” While serving as mayor, Buttigieg took a leave of absence for a tour of duty in Afghanistan.  So, what are his priorities? Ideologically he’s a progressive, but he hasn’t unveiled specific policies just yet. Instead, Buttigieg is focusing on big ideas. “You know, our party has this tendency to lead with the policies. First, we’ve got to explain our values.” He wants to abolish the electoral college, establish single-payer health care and expand the Supreme Court. “Yeah, but it’s not just about throwing more justices on the court. What I think we need to do is some kind of structural reform that makes the court less political.” He’s also pushing for the religious left to make a comeback. “No one party has a monopoly on faith.” And, he thinks it’s time for a younger voice in politics.  A lot of this is simply the idea that we need generational change.” So, what’s his dynamic with President Trump? Buttigieg is no fan of the Trump administration, especially Vice President Mike Pence, an opponent of same-sex marriage and anti-discrimination laws. “And that’s the thing I wish the Mike Pences of the world would understand, that if you got a problem with who I am, your problem is not with me. Your quarrel, sir, is with my creator.” And Trump has yet to say or tweet anything about “Mayor Pete.” So, what are his chances? Buttigieg made a name for himself when this appearance on CNN went viral. “Do you think Vice President Pence would be a better or worse president than President Trump?” “Ugh.”  Buttigieg raised $7 million for his 2020 bid in the first quarter, enough to qualify for the first Democratic debates in June. But the question is whether this relative newcomer to the national stage can keep up his momentum throughout the long primary season.
“He’s got this way of articulating a vision, which is progressive but not off-putting,” said Mr. Glickman, 74, who led Harvard’s Institute of Politics at the time.
A Times review of Mr. Buttigieg’s writings, starting in college, found that rhetorical task to be a consistent preoccupation. As a student, Mr. Buttigieg, now 37 and the mayor of South Bend, Ind., habitually discussed Democrats’ challenges in terms of language and argument, rather than policy or ideology. Mr. Buttigieg urged liberals in his student columns to speak in terms of “effective political values,” and he recalled corresponding in college with the University of California, Berkeley, linguist George Lakoff, who in 2004 published a best seller about political communication.
In an interview, Mr. Buttigieg said his college writings were no longer fresh in his mind. But then, as now, he acknowledged, he was focused on the interaction of “narrative and politics,” and how parties connect with people beyond policy decrees.
“The story that we tell, not just about government but about ourselves, and the story we tell people about themselves and how they fit in, really grounds our politics,” Mr. Buttigieg said.
“As long as the events can outpace the media’s ability to construct a novelistic story around them, the voters may have some control; but it doesn’t take long to spin a tale,” Mr. Buttigieg wrote in January 2004.
For now, a good number of Democrats appear to be choosing the one Mr. Buttigieg has crafted. He has made an unlikely splash in the race, becoming the first openly gay major presidential candidate and captivating both elite opinion-shapers and swaths of rank-and-file Democrats with his self-assured intellectualism and rhetoric about generational change. Despite lacking traditional qualifications for the presidency and declining, so far, to detail a distinctive policy agenda, Mr. Buttigieg has risen to the middle of the Democratic field in polling numbers and fund-raising.
Propelling Mr. Buttigieg is an anxiety-free persona of the kind he once identified as lacking in Mr. Edwards. He has presented himself as a cerebral type of Jimmy Stewart character, plain-spoken in manner but boasting degrees from Harvard and Oxford, discoursing happily about James Joyce and flaunting his proficiency in Norwegian.
Mr. Buttigieg often appears beside his husband, Chasten Buttigieg, a teacher and emerging social-media star. Both men speak with unselfconscious pride about their marriage, and they display public affection of a kind never seen before in a presidential campaign.
If Mr. Buttigieg shares anything with President Trump, however, it is his reliance on comportment and biography to carry his campaign. Mr. Trump climbed to the White House on the strength of a voluble personality projected over mass media, waxing enthusiastic not about Scandinavian literature but about celebrity gossip and fast food. Even some Democrats appalled by Mr. Trump envy his crude ease with mass communication.
In this respect, Mr. Buttigieg’s campaign is also an echo of his early writings, when he expressed alarm about Democrats struggling to appear as genuine as a president, George W. Bush, whom he viewed as dishonest.
“I believe him,” Mr. Buttigieg wrote.
His preoccupation with language was widely shared among Bush-era Democrats. Liberals’ conviction that their defeats stemmed from failing to communicate made a 2004 tome about political argument, Mr. Lakoff’s “Don’t Think of an Elephant,” into an influential commercial success. Mr. Buttigieg confirmed through a spokeswoman that he had read the book, and said he corresponded as a student with Mr. Lakoff but doubted the linguist would remember.
Mr. Lakoff said in an interview that he did not recall interacting with Mr. Buttigieg, but praised him as a communicator with a gift for breaking down ideas for voters.
Mr. Buttigieg is likely to face pressure, however, to define a clearer governing agenda. At this early stage, he has no equivalent of Senator Kamala Harris’s call to raise teacher salaries or Ms. Warren’s proposed wealth tax, or the pledge by Gov. Jay Inslee of Washington to focus single-mindedly on climate change.
As mayor of a city with about a fifth the population of Staten Island, Mr. Buttigieg lacks the kind of wide-ranging record that has given credibility and depth to other competitors’ rhetoric.
Mr. Buttigieg has stirred suspicion among some Democrats for his hazy commitments on policy. In the left-wing magazine Current Affairs, the editor Nathan J. Robinson ridiculed Mr. Buttigieg as a clever political marketer without ideas or a record undergirding his ambition.
There are policy elements in Mr. Buttigieg’s pitch, many of them tethered to the theme of generational change. He has called for creating a government-backed health insurance option and for aggressively regulating consumer data online, and speaks with fluency about the threats posed to young people by climate change and the replacement of human workers by machines. He has pushed back on the left here and there, rejecting the idea of making free college a government goal.
More provocatively, Mr. Buttigieg has backed two long-shot proposals to restructure the Supreme Court and abolish the Electoral College. And he has praised, without quite endorsing, ideas for taxing carbon fuel and experimenting with a universal basic income policy, whereby the government would issue cash payments to give citizens a minimum sum to live on.
Mr. Buttigieg said he would outline more proposals with time. But he rejected the idea that the Democratic race might hinge on “who has the most elegant policy design.” Because a president cannot execute his plans freely in office, Mr. Buttigieg argued, it would be “inauthentic” to make too many detailed promises.
Mr. Buttigieg’s instinct for simplicity and vagueness appears deeply rooted.
In 2004, he co-wrote a New York Times column describing research into the platforms of political parties, concluding that winning parties tended to have shorter platforms. And in his final column in his college newspaper, Mr. Buttigieg urged Democrats to focus chiefly on reclaiming terms like “morality” and “compassion” from the right.
And perhaps with Mr. Edwards’s stumble as a faintly remembered cautionary tale, Mr. Buttigieg did not hesitate in the interview to disclose some favorite films, naming “The Godfather” and “Gangs of New York,” Martin Scorsese’s violent tale of 19th-century New York City.
Joseph R. Biden Jr. laid out a populist economic vision as part of an effort to more aggressively challenge President Trump on his signature issue.