The sender was He Jiankui, an ambitious, young Chinese scientist. The recipient was his former academic adviser, Stephen Quake, a star Stanford bioengineer and inventor.
Months later, the world learned the outcome of that pregnancy: twins born from genetically engineered embryos, the first gene-altered babies. Reaction was fierce. Many scientists and ethicists condemned the experiment as unethical and unsafe, fearing that it could inspire rogue or frivolous attempts to create permanent genetic changes using unproven and unregulated methods.
Questions about other American scientists’ knowledge of Dr. He’s plans and their failure to sound a loud alarm have been an issue since Dr. He revealed his work in November.
But now, Dr. Quake is facing a Stanford investigation into his interaction with Dr. He. That inquiry began after the president of Dr. He’s Chinese university wrote to Stanford’s president alleging that Dr. Quake had helped Dr. He.
Dr. Quake denied the allegations in a lengthy interview, saying his interaction with Dr. He, who was a postdoctoral student in his lab eight years ago, had been misinterpreted.
Dr. Quake showed The Times what he said were the last few years of his email communication with Dr. He. The correspondence provides a revealing window into the informal way researchers navigate a fast-moving, ethically controversial field.
The emails show that Dr. He, 35, informed Dr. Quake, 49, of milestones, including that the woman became pregnant and gave birth. They show that Dr. Quake advised Dr. He to obtain ethical approval from Chinese institutions and submit the results for vetting by peer-reviewed journals, and that he agreed to Dr. He’s requests to discuss issues like when to present his research publicly.
None of the notes suggest Dr. Quake was involved in the work himself. They do contain expressions of polite encouragement like “good luck!” Though Dr. Quake said he urged Dr. He not to pursue the project during an August 2016 meeting, the emails, mostly sent in 2017 and 2018, don’t tell him to stop.
As global institutions like the World Health Organization work to create a system to keep cowboy scientists from charging into the Wild West of embryo editing, Dr. Quake’s interactions with Dr. He reflect issues that leading scientific institutions are now grappling with.
When and where should scientists report controversial research ideas that colleagues share with them in confidence? Have scientists acted inappropriately if they provide conventional research advice to someone conducting an unorthodox experiment?
“A lot of people wish that those who knew or suspected would have made more noise,” said R. Alta Charo, a bioethicist at the University of Wisconsin-Madison who co-led a 2017 national committee on human embryo editing.
But she said scientists were not necessarily complicit if instead of trying to stop rogue experimenters, they advised them to follow ethical and research standards in hopes that institutions would intervene.
Rice University has been investigating Michael Deem, Dr. He’s Ph.D. adviser, because of allegations that he was actively involved in the project; he had said publicly that he had been present during parts of it. Dr. Deem’s lawyers issued a statement strongly denying the allegations.
Dr. He emailed Dr. Quake months before the gene-edited babies were born.
The correspondence Dr. Quake shared provides new details about Dr. He’s project, also called germline editing, including indications that the twin girls were quite premature and remained hospitalized for several weeks. They were born in October, contrary to previous reports.
Dr. Quake is an entrepreneur whose inventions include blood tests to detect Down syndrome in pregnancy and to avoid organ transplant rejection. He is co-president of an institute funded by the Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg and his wife, Dr. Priscilla Chan. He does not do gene editing and said he was surprised when Dr. He told him during a 2016 visit to Stanford that he wanted to be the first to create gene-edited babies.
That meant obtaining ethical approval from the equivalent of American institutional review boards (known as I.R.B.s), Dr. Quake advised, as well as getting informed consent from the couples participating and only editing genes to address a serious medical need.
In June 2017, Dr. He, nicknamed JK, emailed a document saying a hospital ethics committee had approved his proposal, in which he boasted that his plan could be compared to Nobel-winning research.
As a postdoctoral adviser to Dr. He and other students, Dr. Quake considered his role to be mentorship. Dr. He’s work in his lab did not involve gene editing; it concerned immune responses to the flu vaccine.
After leaving for the university job in China in 2012, Dr. He sought Dr. Quake’s help with starting a company based on a genome-sequencing technique Dr. Quake had invented. Dr. Quake, whose American firm selling that technique had gone bankrupt, made introductions that helped Dr. He license patents for his company, Direct Genomics. Dr. Quake visited in 2015 but eventually declined an offer to serve on the company’s scientific advisory board.
In Dr. He’s 2017 correspondence, he said he would be editing a gene called CCR5, altering a mutation that allows people to become infected with H.I.V. Many scientists have since argued it was medically unnecessary because babies of H.I.V.-positive parents can be protected other ways. Dr. Quake said he believed there was not scientific consensus about that.
Dr. Quake did not reply immediately. Instead, he forwarded the email to someone he described as a senior gene-editing expert “who I felt could give me advice.” He redacted the name of the expert.
Dr. He visited Dr. Quake at Stanford to discuss the results of the experiment.Credit...
“Interesting. Source?” the scientist responded.
At the scientist’s suggestion, they spoke on the phone.
The scientist suggested that Dr. He share his work at a genome-editing conference in Hong Kong.
He advised Dr. He to submit the research to a peer-reviewed journal, and Dr. He did so.
But Dr. He went forward with his Hong Kong talk. Two days before it, after news of the twins broke, Dr. Quake emailed, “Good luck with your upcoming presentation!” But he added, “please remove my name” from the slide acknowledging people who had helped.
Dr. Quake is not sure what consequences he thinks Dr. He should face.
But he believes that the shock and horror some scientists now express belies the unruffled response of the experts he consulted.
