SEATTLE — Four people were killed after a construction crane fell from the top of a building in Seattle and crushed six vehicles on the street below, the authorities said.
The Seattle fire chief, Harold Scoggins, said in a news conference that two of the four people killed were crane operators and that the other two had been in separate vehicles. Four other people had non-life-threatening injuries, the Fire Department said.
A piece of the yellow crane was slashed across a seven-lane road on Saturday afternoon, with crime scene tape cordoning off an area about five blocks long. At least one car was still crushed beneath the wreckage, a jarring contrast to the boxy glass and precise corners of the tech and research buildings common in the surrounding South Lake Union neighborhood.
Lights flashed from about 30 police vehicles as small groups of bystanders looked on.
Ceara Nicosia, who works for a biotechnology company with offices across the street, heard a rumble that she thought was an earthquake, and then a crash. She looked out a window to see a giant cloud of dust.
It was not immediately clear what caused the crane to fall from the building, which is about six stories high. Construction on the site, which is being developed by Seattle-based Vulcan Inc., is still proceeding.
Eric Greening, an assistant chief with the Seattle Police Department, said at a news conference that “there was some work being done” on Saturday, but he declined to provide further details.
The Seattle Fire Department referred questions about the investigation to the state’s Department of Labor and Industries. The department did not immediately respond to a request for comment.
Some said on social media that they had observed strong winds in the area of the collapse, but the National Weather Service said on Twitter that wind measurements nearby at the time registered gusts of 18 and 23 miles per hour.
“Would not consider these strong wind gusts,” the Weather Service wrote.
Once home to the city’s logging and maritime industries, the South Lake Union neighborhood has grown substantially in the last 15 years, like Seattle as a whole. Many technology companies and research laboratories are there, along with restaurants and residential buildings.
Amazon and the Seattle Cancer Care Alliance have offices in the neighborhood, according to the South Lake Union Chamber of Commerce, and a Google logo can be seen on the building that the crane fell from.
Google said the site was slated to become the company’s Seattle campus, but it had not yet moved in because the site was under construction.
“Our deepest sympathies go out to the families who have lost loved ones and our hope is that those who have been injured return to full health as soon as possible,” the statement said.
The Seattle Times reported this year that the construction of new high-rises has meant that the city has more cranes than any other city in the United States for the third year in a row.