The world wants to help. The terrorists won’t allow it.
Mr. Greenblatt is an assistant to President Trump and the special representative for international negotiations.
In these wars, Hamas and other terrorist groups launched thousands of rockets. Each new attack on Israeli communities forces Israel to adopt more restrictive measures on imports to Gaza to prevent the illicit transfer of goods that could be used to build and expand the militants’ arsenals. The international community donated funds for reconstruction of homes, but Hamas diverted these supplies to build the infrastructure for war instead of schools and hospitals.
Examples abound. Cement for building homes, schools and hospitals was diverted to build and reinforce tunnels under the boundary between Gaza and Israel that terrorist groups use to carry out attacks. When concrete was limited, wooden pallets were used instead. Pipes were used to manufacture rockets instead of improving the water distribution systems. Chemicals for bottling and canning were diverted to create rocket fuel. Electrodes for rockets were reportedly smuggled in butter containers and concealed in shipments of marble slabs.
Each time Hamas’s nefarious uses are discovered, Israel must make adjustments to prevent terrorists from using items as tools of war. Each new security measure slows, or in some cases prevents, legitimate business.
Recently, Gazans have been protesting against their Hamas rulers. The people living in these unbearable conditions are beginning to hold Hamas responsible for not providing services or opportunities. Hamas’s brand of hatred and violence has led the population to extreme hardship. When the demonstrators voiced their disapproval of how Hamas was governing, the first response of Hamas was to direct violence — vicious beatings and torture — against its own people.
Hamas has driven the people of Gaza into lives of misery in a bid to stay in power. A recognition of its dismal failure and an honest assessment of reality could pave the way to reconnect Gaza to the world that wants to help. The situation was not caused by the United States; it was caused by Hamas. The United States does not want this situation to continue — but we cannot fix it.
The world is waiting to help again but has been prevented from doing so by the choices made by Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and other terror groups operating in Gaza. We need to be realistic. Whether or not we achieve a comprehensive peace agreement between Israel and the Palestinians, the future of Gaza cannot be addressed and the people of Gaza cannot be helped in any meaningful way until Hamas is no longer in the picture or makes the necessary choices for stability and, eventually, peace. To achieve peace — or even some normalcy — in Gaza, Hamas and others must make hard choices, including renouncing violence and recognizing Israel. Imagine if Hamas put the people of Gaza first. Imagine if Hamas chose peace.
Jason D. Greenblatt (@JDGreenblatt45) is an assistant to President Trump and the special representative for international negotiations.