The decision was welcomed by the Trump administration and came just weeks after Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said Washington would deny visas to the court’s staff and judges involved in prosecuting or ruling on war crimes involving Americans. Last week the State Department confirmed that the United States visa of the court’s chief prosecutor, Fatou Bensouda, had been revoked.
But the decision by the judges, which took nearly 18 months to reach, troubled lawyers and stunned human rights activists, who said the court had capitulated to what they called Trump administration intimidation and pressure that had weakened the court’s credibility.
“With its decision today, the International Criminal Court sends a dangerous message: that bullying wins and that the powerful won’t be held to account,” said Katherine Gallagher, a senior staff lawyer for the Center for Constitutional Rights in New York.
The White House issued a statement by Mr. Trump praising the decision, coupled with a reiteration of the longstanding United States position that the International Criminal Court has no jurisdiction to prosecute any Americans, including those who served in Afghanistan or elsewhere.
The court’s judges said the lack of cooperation so far by all sides — including the United States, the Afghan authorities and the Taliban — meant that pursuing a successful investigation and prosecution would be a poor use of the court’s resources.
Nonetheless, human rights advocates assailed the decision as a startling retreat from the court’s purpose of providing war-crimes victims with a means of seeking justice. Some said the language of the court’s decision masked what was effectively a capitulation to the United States.
Mr. Dakwar said the administration was “playing a dangerous game” that had severe implications for other prosecutions by the court.
“No one except the world’s most brutal regimes win when we weaken and sabotage international institutions established to fight impunity and hold human rights abusers accountable,” he said.
The retreat on Afghanistan compounds the litany of setbacks that has confronted the court. Burundi and the Philippines have withdrawn from the treaty that created the court nearly two decades ago. Ms. Bensouda was forced to drop a case against Kenya’s leaders in 2014 for lack of cooperation.
The just-ousted president of Sudan, Omar Hassan al-Bashir, has been wanted by the court on charges including genocide for a decade, but the generals who toppled him said Friday they will not extradite him.
Ms. Bensouda requested authorization from the judges in November 2017 to begin a formal investigation into possible war crimes and crimes against humanity that followed the American-led invasion of Afghanistan in early 2002 to rout the Al Qaeda plotters of the Sept. 11, 2001 attacks and the Taliban rulers who had sheltered them.
Although the United States is not a member of the International Criminal Court, established nearly two decades ago, American governments have cooperated, or at least not interfered, with the court on some of its work in other investigations.
Americans suspected of having committed crimes in countries that are members of the court are potentially subject to prosecution. Afghanistan, Poland, Lithuania and Romania are all members.
Param-Preet Singh, associate director of the International Justice Program at Human Rights Watch, called the court’s decision a “devastating blow” to victims.
Guenael Mettraux, a Swiss scholar who has also appeared before international tribunals in The Hague, said the court’s decision was self-destructive to its own authority.
He said the judges had effectively affirmed the view of critics who argue that the court only prosecutes those too weak to stand up to it.
Some legal experts, however, said the judges had made a sensible decision by foreseeing frustration and failure in prosecuting a case in which all the major parties were not cooperating.
“The perception will be that the court cowed to Washington, but the judges are being realistic,” said Alex Whiting, a former American prosecutor at the court who now teaches at Harvard Law School.
He said that lessons drawn from recent setbacks and failed cases at the court showed it must focus on situations where it can succeed. “The prosecution has already come to that realization and now the judges are too,” he said.
