TAMPA, Fla. — The game was billed as old school versus new school. The bruising, defensive-minded bigs of the Baylor Lady Bears against the spread-the-floor, pick-and-roll, 3-point-launching Oregon Ducks.
And there was Baylor’s powerhouse duo in the post — the 6-foot-7 Kalani Brown and the 6-4 Lauren Cox — versus Oregon’s state-of-the-art triple-double machine in the backcourt, Sabrina Ionescu.
 With a 72-67 victory on Friday, the top-seeded Lady Bears advanced to Sunday’s final and will play against Notre Dame, the defending champion, for their first national title since 2012. Baylor also won the title in 2005. Oregon, seeded second, was playing in its first Final Four.
Brown finished with 22 points, and Cox had 21. Ionescu, the career leader in N.C.A.A. triple-doubles for men and women, finished with 18 points, 6 assists and 4 rebounds.
Though the Lady Bears won on the strength of their superb post players, the clutch player in the waning moments was guard Chloe Jackson, a graduate transfer from Louisiana State. Jackson breezed by several defenders to hit the go-ahead layup with 41 seconds left. Brown and Cox sealed the victory with free throws.
For Baylor, the Ducks were the first real challenge of this tournament. Entering the Final Four, the Lady Bears had rolled over their opponents by an average margin of 38.2 points. This game had 12 lead changes and 12 ties.
Despite the different styles of play, Baylor Coach Kim Mulkey did not see the matchup as simply old school versus new. She said her team could adapt to whatever style was needed.
After being held scoreless in the first quarter, Ionescu, the most dynamic player in the game, took over. With seconds remaining in the first half, she dribbled behind the 3-point arc and let loose a shot with Baylor’s best defender, DiDi Richards, as close as the number on her Ducks jersey.
As her right arm lingered in the air, Richards smacked it hard, sending Ionescu to the floor. Still on the ground, Ionescu turned and stared down Richards with a look that could launch a thousand memes. Enough was enough.
By the end of the half, Ionescu had a dozen points and Oregon had a 34-33 lead.
But Brown and the Lady Bears would not be denied. This was the moment Brown had dreamed about.
Mulkey has talked repeatedly about wanting to see Brown rewarded with a championship in her senior year.
The coach has known Brown since she was considerably smaller. Brown’s mother, Dee, played at Louisiana Tech when Mulkey was an assistant there. Mulkey took over as the coach of Baylor in 2000.
Brown’s other parent is P. J. Brown, whose 15-year N.B.A. career ended with his first title in 2008, when he was with the Boston Celtics. Brown was in the arena the night her father hoisted the Larry O’Brien Trophy. Now she hopes to hoist her own.