LOS ANGELES — The ever-evolving Los Angeles County Museum of Art has cleared its biggest hurdle to erecting a radical new building by the Swiss architect Peter Zumthor that represents one of the country’s most ambitious museum transformations.
The county board of supervisors voted Tuesday to approve the current plan and release $117.5 million in taxpayer funding for it, despite last-minute entreaties from some art and architecture critics who urged the board to vote against the project.
Michael Govan, the museum’s director, in turn, took to the Opinion page of The Los Angeles Times to present his case.
In the week running up to the vote, the $650 million project, which is mainly privately funded, received its sharpest criticisms yet. The independent architecture critic Joseph Giovannini and The Los Angeles Times art critic Christopher Knight both described problems with the Zumthor design — a sweeping, one-level structure perched on pavilions that will replace four ailing structures.
Mr. Giovannini wrote that the museum would be assuming an “unprecedented and unconscionable” amount of debt. In his fourth article on the subject in the Los Angeles Review of Books, he notes that Lacma already carries $343 million in debt.
On the issue of shrinking square footage, he countered that he has expanded gallery space significantly with the addition of two exhibition halls designed by Renzo Piano (the Broad Contemporary Art Museum, known as BCAM, and the Resnick Pavilion) that were built on the campus during his tenure. He also cited recent measurements his staff made of the original four buildings that found the new plan decreases gallery space by only 4,000 square feet.
Nicolas Berggruen, a museum trustee, who is also building a research group known as the Berggruen Institute near the Getty Center, said focusing on square footage — which shifted over time, in part because of environmental concerns — missed the point.
One reason the stakes are so high is that Los Angeles has historically been home to few great examples of public architecture. Many of its most important innovations have been residential, including homes by Frank Lloyd Wright, Rudolph M. Schindler and Richard Neutra. Frank Gehry’s Disney Hall, a widely celebrated building that gives Angelenos an image of their own city beyond the Hollywood sign, took over a decade to complete and almost wasn’t built for lack of funding. And Rem Koolhaas’s proposal to overhaul the Lacma campus, which won a 2001 design competition, failed because of funding challenges.
Even opponents of the plan agree that the four buildings slated for demolition, three of which were designed by William Pereira in the 1960s, need to be replaced.
Mr. Zumthor, a Pritzker-winning architect, earns accolades for the restrained quality of his buildings and his sensitivity to materials. But some say that his strengths could be a weakness at such a large scale and that he has not built in the United States before.
Demolition of the old buildings is set for early 2020, with the opening of the new building planned for 2024.