On the last day of Passover, a gunman opened fire inside a synagogue in Poway, Calif., killing one person and wounding three others. Authorities said a man was taken into custody in connection with the shooting.
LOS ANGELES — The gunman entered the synagogue on Saturday yelling anti-Semitic slurs, and opened fire with an A.R. 15-style gun. He paused when the rabbi of the congregation tried to talk with him. But he fired again, shooting the rabbi in the hand.
His attack left a 60-year-old woman dead, the rabbi wounded and a 34-year-old man and a girl with shrapnel wounds.
It was the Sabbath and the last day of Passover, a holiday that celebrates Jewish freedom.
The shooting, at Chabad of Poway, about 25 miles north of San Diego, is the most recent in a series of deadly attacks at houses of worship, including the mass shooting at mosques in New Zealand last month and the church bombings in Sri Lanka this past week. It came exactly six months after one of the worst acts of violence against the American Jewish community in decades left 11 dead in a Pittsburgh synagogue.
Local officials called the shooting in Poway, Calif., a hate crime. The gunman, whom officials identified as John Earnest, a 19-year-old resident of San Diego, screamed that Jews were ruining the world as he stormed the synagogue, according to a government official with knowledge of the investigation who spoke on the condition of anonymity because the official was not authorized to speak publicly.
The gunman then fled the building, perhaps because his gun stopped working, the authorities said. An off-duty Border Patrol agent at the synagogue shot at the suspect’s vehicle as he tried to escape. The bullets punctured the suspect’s car but did not injure him.
The synagogue did not have a guard at the time, the official said, and there were about 40 to 60 people there at the time of the shooting. Some had come to services especially to say Yizkor, a memorial prayer for the dead that is said on Jewish holidays.
The rabbi, Yisroel Goldstein, and three of his congregants were taken to Palomar Medical Center.
The San Diego police chief, David Nisleit, said that after the shooting, the gunman called the California Highway Patrol to report his location on Interstate 15 in Rancho Bernardo. He then surrendered to a police officer who was responding to the attack, jumping out of his vehicle with his hands up.
The police said they were investigating whether the gunman had posted a manifesto before the shooting on the online message board 8chan.
 The document’s author, who identified himself as John Earnest, claimed to have been inspired by the Christchurch massacre, as well as the shooting in Pittsburgh, and motivated by the same white nationalist cause.
Jonathan Greenblatt, the chief executive and national director of the Anti-Defamation League, which has tracked an increase in anti-Semitic acts in recent years, said the shooting was part of a pattern of deadly extremism.
The author of the manifesto also said that he was responsible for a fire at a mosque in Escondido, Calif., last month, and that he had written graffiti related to the New Zealand attacks at the scene.
Chief Craig Carter of the Escondido Police Department said that investigators were examining whether the claim was legitimate. “If it is indeed the same person, that would definitely give closure to the mosque and our community,” Chief Carter said.
The document also referred to a live video stream and linked to a Facebook page, an indication that the author may have tried to stream the shooting in real time.
Attendance at the synagogue was larger than usual because of the holiday, with many older congregants there to pray for their deceased parents, said Oscar Stewart, who was inside the synagogue during the shooting. At the time, Rabbi Goldstein was speaking to a congregant in the lobby.
When Mr. Stewart heard shots ring out, he said his training from his years in the military kicked in.
Mr. Stewart said the gunman fled shortly after. “He was a coward,” he added.
Services started at 10 a.m. and Ms. Levanoni and her husband, Menachem Levanoni, 81, the former president of the synagogue, got there closer to 11:15 a.m.
They headed toward the synagogue, where Ms. Levanoni saw the rabbi bleeding from a finger, where he appeared to have been shot. One of her closest friends was on the floor, she said.
Ms. Levanoni learned that her friend had been shot and was seriously injured. The pair had been friends for 17 years and the victim was very active in the synagogue, she said.
Walter Vandivort, who lives in the neighborhood of the synagogue, said he had heard gunshots while he was indoors.
He described the neighborhood as a “peaceful, middle-class” area that had never seen this kind of violence in the decades he had lived there.
“I see the Orthodox Jews walking to their synagogue and we’ve never had a problem,” he said. The Chabad of Poway was established in 1986, according to its website, part of the Lubavitch movement that focuses on outreach.
Poway, which describes itself as “the city in the country,” is both rural and urban, a place where sports stars have made their homes, and where horse trailers are parked in front of many houses.
Neighbors gathered on the sidewalks near the synagogue as police officers taped off and closed major roads. Officials in San Diego said that they would increase highly visible patrols and security through the weekend, but that there were no other specific threats.
As helicopters flew overhead, Judith Zimmer, a member of Chabad Poway, stood outside of nearby Poway High School, which was being used as a meeting place, and tried to call her daughters in San Diego to tell them that she was fine and had not been at the service at the time of the shooting.
People held hands as they walked into the high school. One man was holding a teenage girl tightly, his arm wrapped around her. Most of them looked down at the ground as they went inside.
As palm trees swayed under a bright blue sky, officers diverted traffic, and drivers looked out of their windows trying to see past the yellow tape that was blocking the main thoroughfare.
