Pete Buttigieg, the 37-year-old Democratic mayor of South Bend, Ind., has gained surprising early visibility in the 2020 presidential race. 
A millennial mayor with a difficult last name. [Mispronunciations of “Buttigieg.”] And, a knack for languages. [“Good morning, America” in several languages.] Pete Buttigieg is in the race for the White House. “I am running for president of the United States.” So, who is he? Buttigieg, also known as — “Mayor Pete” — is the mayor of South Bend, Ind. He got the job when he was just 29 and quickly moved to reverse the city’s economic decline. “Our hometown is not dead.” While serving as mayor, Buttigieg took a leave of absence for a tour of duty in Afghanistan.  So, what are his priorities? Ideologically he’s a progressive, but he hasn’t unveiled specific policies just yet. Instead, Buttigieg is focusing on big ideas. “You know, our party has this tendency to lead with the policies. First, we’ve got to explain our values.” He wants to abolish the electoral college, establish single-payer health care and expand the Supreme Court. “Yeah, but it’s not just about throwing more justices on the court. What I think we need to do is some kind of structural reform that makes the court less political.” He’s also pushing for the religious left to make a comeback. “No one party has a monopoly on faith.” And, he thinks it’s time for a younger voice in politics.  A lot of this is simply the idea that we need generational change.” So, what’s his dynamic with President Trump? Buttigieg is no fan of the Trump administration, especially Vice President Mike Pence, an opponent of same-sex marriage and anti-discrimination laws. “And that’s the thing I wish the Mike Pences of the world would understand, that if you got a problem with who I am, your problem is not with me. Your quarrel, sir, is with my creator.” And Trump has yet to say or tweet anything about “Mayor Pete.” So, what are his chances? Buttigieg made a name for himself when this appearance on CNN went viral. “Do you think Vice President Pence would be a better or worse president than President Trump?” “Ugh.”  Buttigieg raised $7 million for his 2020 bid in the first quarter, enough to qualify for the first Democratic debates in June. But the question is whether this relative newcomer to the national stage can keep up his momentum throughout the long primary season.
SOUTH BEND, Ind. — Pete Buttigieg, the young Midwestern mayor whose presidential bid has been an unlikely early focus of attention from Democratic voters and donors, kicked off his campaign on Sunday and proclaimed his hometown’s revival was the answer to skeptics who ask how he has the “audacity” to see himself in the White House.
If elected, Mr. Buttigieg, a 37-year-old Rhodes scholar and veteran of the war in Afghanistan, would represent a series of historic firsts: the youngest president ever and the first who is openly gay.
And he invoked his marriage to his husband, Chasten Buttigieg, as one of the blessings of American freedom, but one that feels fragile in the current climate.
Though Mr. Buttigieg is a political progressive, his main message is the claim to leadership of millennial Americans, those he says will be on “the business end” of climate change, who grew up with school shootings and who supplied most of the troops in America’s wars in Iraq and Afghanistan.
Little known just two months ago, Mr. Buttigieg has won support and financial backing through a blitz of television interviews in which he has given earnest, nuanced responses that make liberal points without raising the temperature.

Videos showcasing his assorted talents have been online hits, including him speaking in Norwegian and playing piano with the singer Ben Folds and the South Bend Symphony. By some measures, his candidacy has generated more social media interest than any other 2020 Democratic hopeful.
Once considered the longest of long shots, he has seen a surge in fund-raising and in polls. His campaign reported raising $7 million in the first quarter of the year, a more than respectable figure. Last week, polls of Iowa and New Hampshire showed Mr. Buttigieg trailing only Senator Bernie Sanders and former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr., and ahead of better-known candidates including Senator Elizabeth Warren and former Representative Beto O’Rourke.
Today, businesses and pedestrians have returned to parts of downtown, including the new offices in the former Studebaker factory.
“I’m glad you can see this for yourself, because this city’s story is a big part of why I am doing this,’’ he said, speaking in an unrestored part of the factory where the vaulted roof leaked on a rainy day.
Not everyone has benefited from the city’s post-recession growth. Some black and Hispanic residents, who account for 40 percent of the population, feel left out.
“It’s hard for me to say this is a turnaround city,” said Regina Williams-Preston, who is running in municipal elections to replace Mr. Buttigieg.
