Book Review|A TV Comic Invites a Young Staffer to His Country House. Then Something Funny Doesn’t Happen.
A TV Comic Invites a Young Staffer to His Country House. Then Something Funny Doesn’t Happen.
Fictional comedians don’t have to be good at their jobs to get laughs. “Larry Sanders” was an extremely funny TV show about a mediocre TV show produced by characters grappling with its mediocrity. So was “30 Rock.” Contrast those with Aaron Sorkin’s misguided “Studio 60 on the Sunset Strip,” whose problem wasn’t merely that the jokes were bad, it was that none of the characters seemed to enjoy writing them.
“Stay Up With Hugo Best,” Erin Somers’s taut and incisive debut novel, combines the cynicism of “Larry Sanders” with the misplaced seriousness of “Studio 60.” It is a tender, if occasionally joyless, portrait of bizarro-world comedy writers who wish everyone would knock it off with all the joking around already.
The novel picks up where its eponymous fictional late-night talk show ends. After 25 years, the titular host — a Letterman stand-in furnished with Fairfield County mansion, menagerie of exotic cars and “Tonight Show” heartbreak — is stepping down, and neither he nor June Bloom, the show’s standoffish writers’ assistant, has much of a plan for what happens once “Stay Up” goes to bed.
Despite the comedic premise, comedic personae and Seussian rhythm to “June Bloom,” don’t expect a rollicking weekend: In Connecticut, there’s a pool, but almost no fun. Best and Bloom don’t riff; they don’t heighten each other’s jokes; they don’t do impressions. Instead, before they even uncork the weekend’s first bottle of wine, the two are grilling each other about the psychological catalysts for pursuing a career in comedy. “It’s not always something in their past,” Best tells Bloom about comedians, “sometimes it’s clinical. Is it clinical for you?” The idea that any comedian would non-ironically engage in a conversation about the clinical causes and underlying pathology of late-night jokes is, well, laughable.
And yet these protagonists are unable to laugh at themselves, or mine their tragedies for humor. Bloom volunteers that she’s had an abortion, then apologizes: “I’m not trying to be flip about it.” Why not? You’re a comedy writer! Be flip! Flip away! For his part, Best confesses that his father was “distant. Ragey. The type of person who would hit a kid with a closed fist.” His mother “had boundary issues of her own.” In terms of comedy-writer verisimilitude, the lack of flip is fatal.
Not much happens. The weekend unfurls like a Greenwich lawn: a languorous expanse partitioned by various mansions.  In the car, Best puts on a Steve Martin record; Bloom asks if he ever listens to NPR. At a bar, she leaves a stand-up set to wander around a Walgreens. A Walgreens! The least amusing drugstore there is!
And yet, Somers is clear — exquisitely, wrenchingly so — when articulating Bloom’s lifelong fixation on Best: “The double whammy of loving him and also wanting to be him.” Bloom is in Connecticut — and in comedy — because that’s where she’s always wanted to be. And the heartbreak of being 29 isn’t figuring out how to leave, but figuring out where to go. This process can be gutting, but as most of us eventually learn, it does help to have a sense of humor about the whole thing, too.