DANCE AND PROCESS at the Kitchen (April 5, 8 p.m.; April 6, 2 p.m.). This long-running series displays new pieces created during a 10-week group process wherein artists show work and discuss their work. It’s serious business: Participants meet each Sunday for four hours to explore the nitty-gritty of choreographic and dance practice. This round, facilitated by Moriah Evans and Yve Laris Cohen, highlights dances by Mayfield Brooks, Stacy Grossfield, Christopher Unpezverde Nuñéz and Rebecca Serrell Cyr.
URSULA EAGLY at Danspace Project (April 11, 8 and 9 p.m.; through April 13). This cerebral choreographer returns to Danspace with the premiere of “Our Epithelium,” a work featuring a large cast — performers include Madeline Best, Peggy Cheng, Rebecca Davis and Kay Ottinger — for a small audience. “Our Epithelium,” named after the tissues that line organs and blood vessels throughout the body, explores those physical systems. In the press materials, the piece is described as “barely performative,” and Eagly states that “we can’t do it without you.” What could that mean? Eagly likely has some audience participation up her sleeve.
I WANT TO BE WITH YOU EVERYWHERE at Performance Space New York and the Whitney Museum of American Art (April 11-14). As part of No Series, this disabled arts festival, presented by Performance Space in conjunction with the Whitney and the Scottish organization Arika, focuses on disability aesthetics and justice with plenty of experimental dance and performance. It includes Kayla Hamilton’s “Nearly Sighted/Unearthing the Dark,” a sensorial exploration of what it means to see and be seen, and Alice Sheppard’s “Where Good Souls Fear,” in which she explores the minimal and maximal effects of movement while challenging what propriety means for black women. As festivals go, this one is packed and provocative.
STEPHEN PETRONIO COMPANY at N.Y.U. Skirball Center for the Performing Arts (April 11-13, 7:30 p.m.). Petronio presents the fifth edition of “Bloodlines,” an autobiographical project that pays homage to the creators of postmodern dance and traces the choreographer’s own influences. This season contains some gems: In addition to Merce Cunningham’s “Tread” (1970), with décor by Bruce Nauman — 10 industrial fans blow into the audience — there is Rudy Perez’s “Coverage” (1970). Perez, who studied with Cunningham, was a rarity: an artist of color in Judson Dance Theater, the 1960s collective that helped usher in postmodern dance. The program also features the premiere of Petronio’s “American Landscapes,” with the artist Robert Longo providing the visual design and the lute player Jozef van Wissem and the filmmaker Jim Jarmusch composing the score.
SPOTLIGHT: KELLY BARTNIK at Gibney (April 11-13, 8 p.m.). Gibney’s new commissioning and presenting program focuses on developing artistic voices. In Bartnik’s 75-minute premiere, she explores the disconnect between words and actions. As she asks in the press materials, “How do emotions manifest in our bodies and what is the resulting effect of how we choose to name them?” Collaborating with her dancers — Alexandra Beller, Donna Costello, Sara Galassini and Penelope McCourty — Bartnik shines her spotlight on the places that we keep most quiet.
