The scholar of religion Albert Blackwell has remarked of Bach’s “St. Matthew Passion” that its “chorales are not dramatic music, but they impart musical drama.” Hymn verses appear five times in the oratorio, descending through the keys of E, E-flat and C major toward the darkness and radical tonal uncertainty of the Crucifixion itself. For others, like the directors Jonathan Miller and Peter Sellars, the drama of this musical work has required actual staging.
It could be said of the poet and critic Ilya Kaminsky’s new book, “Deaf Republic” — his second full-length collection — that it is not dramatic poetry, but that it imparts poetic drama. What is essentially a collection of lyric poems is presented as if it were a play in two acts, including a list of “Dramatis Personae” at the beginning. The characters, setting and action of this non-play seem to derive in an enigmatic way from the facts of Kaminsky’s own life — he is described as “hard of hearing,” was born in Odessa when it was part of the Soviet Union and emigrated to the United States at the age of 16 knowing no English — and in a direct way from his identity as a sentient human being in an age of global warfare against civilians. These poems bestow the power of sacred drama on a secular martyrology.
In a narrative that is depressingly familiar to anyone who follows today’s news, citizens are tortured and executed amid the horror of what emerges as a small-town civil war. It claims the lives of the newlyweds Alfonso and Sonya Barabinski, also puppeteers, whose erotic life flowers in the birth of Anushka, a child of the insurgency. Puppets are hung on the porches and doors of those arrested, like tokens for the angel of death. Briefly the rebellion gains the upper hand; one soldier is publicly executed, and others are strangled after being intoxicated by women. But by Act II, mass reprisals against citizens are taking place, and the soldiers are firebombing the stores of those suspected of participating in the rebellion. The cycle of repression and retribution appears to be unending. And lest any reader take comfort in the distance provided by reading these poems as parables rather than as news, Kaminsky begins the volume with a poem titled “We Lived Happily During the War,” and elsewhere twice declares, “Our country is the stage.” The complacency of the United States, in the face of the wars it has made or supported, is as inescapable as its indictment.
The poet Anthony Hecht found in Kaminsky “a superb and vigorous imagination, a poetic talent of rare and beautiful proportions,” and part of the power of “Deaf Republic” lies in its exercise of the imagination, rather than what Kaminsky has identified as the “relentless search for irony in things.” There is irony, of course, when those who have been deaf to the suffering of others (and will be so again) choose to feign deafness as an eloquent response to oppression. But that is no easy irony. And “Deaf Republic” is no easy book. A visit to this republic will not leave the reader unchanged.