WASHINGTON — Joe Biden knew Anita Hill was going to be an issue for him. So a few weeks ago, as he prepared for his presidential announcement, he reached out to her through an intermediary and arranged a telephone call, hoping to assuage her.
Justice Thomas’s confirmation hearings in October 1991 riveted the nation, serving up a volatile mix of race and gender on national television. Ms. Hill was the reluctant witness, a young African-American law professor who had worked with Justice Thomas and was grilled in excruciatingly graphic detail by an all-white, all-male Judiciary Committee led by Mr. Biden, then a senator from Delaware.
Ms. Hill, a deeply private woman who does not often speak publicly about her experience, said she does not find Mr. Biden’s conduct disqualifying. “I’m really open to people changing,” she said.
But, she added, she cannot support Mr. Biden for president until he takes full responsibility for his conduct, including his failure to call as corroborating witnesses other women who were willing to testify before the Judiciary Committee. By leaving them out, she said, he created a “he said, she said” situation that did not have to exist.
The Biden campaign said Thursday that it would have no comment beyond its initial statement on Ms. Hill’s reaction to the call from Mr. Biden. “They had a private discussion where he shared with her directly his regret for what she endured and his admiration for everything she has done to change the culture around sexual harassment in this country,” said the deputy campaign manager, Kate Bedingfield.
Mr. Biden’s disclosure, and Ms. Hill’s interview, underscore the former vice president’s potential vulnerability from an event that is nearly three decades old, but that has new resonance in the #MeToo era and the aftermath of last year’s Kavanaugh hearings. That it erupted so quickly, with his campaign only hours old, suggests that Mr. Biden’s treatment of Ms. Hill will echo throughout his campaign unless he can find a way to convincingly put it to rest.
In recent interviews, Ms. Hill and others involved in the confirmation fight portrayed Mr. Biden’s handling of the hearing as at best inept and at worst deeply insensitive. They fault his refusal to seriously investigate her accusations and take public testimony from other potential witnesses who said the future justice had acted inappropriately with them. Justice Thomas has denied any inappropriate behavior.
One of those potential witnesses, Sukari Hardnett, a lawyer in Silver Spring, Md., said in an interview that she decided to come forward while watching the hearing when she “saw what they were doing to Anita Hill and how they were literally trying to trash her.” Ms. Hardnett wrote a letter detailing her own experiences and submitted it to the committee through the dean of her law school, expecting to be called to testify. But she said she was not.
Another woman who sought to testify, Angela Wright, called Mr. Biden “pretty much useless” last year in an interview.
Ms. Wright, Ms. Hartnett and one other woman, Rose Jourdain, who died in 2010, were ready to back up Ms. Hill’s account before the committee, but Mr. Biden ended the hearings before they were heard from in public. Over the years, Mr. Biden has suggested they either backed out or were reluctant.
With Mr. Biden almost an instant front-runner in a very crowded Democratic field, the subject of Anita Hill is a delicate one among Democrats — even those who believe Mr. Biden bungled the hearings. Many former Judiciary Committee aides and other people who participated did not want to talk on the record because they feared that scrutiny of Mr. Biden’s past conduct would undermine the campaign of the candidate some think could be best positioned to defeat President Trump, whose treatment of women is a huge issue for Democrats.
Some of Mr. Biden’s former colleagues who served with him said that while he might have erred in the Thomas hearings, his full record needs to be considered rather than only one element of a lengthy career in politics.
Some say Mr. Biden was more sensitive to the fact that Justice Thomas was African-American than to issues of gender; others say he was loath to investigate Ms. Hill’s accusations in part because he wanted the confirmation hearings to focus on legal issues, not personal ones.
Ms. Boxer and others credit Mr. Biden for quickly realizing that his all-male panel was ill equipped to fairly evaluate such issues as sexual harassment and for bringing Senator Dianne Feinstein, Democrat of California, on to the panel as soon as she was elected to the Senate in 1992.
Biden Has a Long Record. Will This Help or Hurt Him?
Joseph R. Biden Jr. was a two-term vice president and spent 36 years as a senator. But his front-runner status in the Democratic primary will be tested by the party’s desire for generational change.
A former vice president known for — “My love affair with Amtrak.” “Back on Amtrak” — and his famous friend. “This also gives the internet one last chance to talk about our bromance.” Joe Biden is running for president. “Today, I am announcing my candidacy for president of the United States. He’s tried it before. “And with the grace of God and the support of the American people, I mean to be that kind of president.” Twice. “This is not about experience. It’s not about change. It’s about action.” So, why does he think the third time’s a charm? Biden may be betting that in this politically tumultuous time, voters are looking for a familiar face. He arrived in Washington before C-Span existed and before these members of Congress were born. His credentials are unmatched in the Democratic Party. He served two terms as vice president, 36 years in the Senate and has chaired powerful congressional committees. And he’s earned himself a few nicknames along the way. “Working-Class Joe.” “Working-Class Joe Biden.” “Old Uncle Joe Biden.” “Crazy Uncle Joe Biden, just being Biden.” So, what are Biden’s priorities? He’s a moderate Democrat and is likely to focus on: expanding health care, investing in education and rebuilding relationships with allies. “The America I see does not wish to turn our back on the world or our allies. We will be back.” But his decadeslong record comes with some baggage, including his support for the Iraq war. “President Bush is right to be concerned about Saddam Hussein’s relentless pursuit of weapons of mass destruction.” Tough anti-crime policies. “First, we have to join together to ensure that drug dealers are punished swiftly, surely and severely.” And his role in the Anita Hill hearing. “It is appropriate to ask Professor Hill anything any member wishes to ask her to plumb the depths of her credibility.” More recently, several women have come forward saying they were uncomfortable with the way Biden touched them.  Biden responded on Twitter. “The boundaries of protected personal space have been reset and I get it. I will be more mindful and respectful of people’s personal space. So, how has Biden taken on President Trump? They’ve had their share of fighting words.  Trump shot back on Twitter, and said Biden “would go down fast and hard, crying all the way.” Biden later said he regretted his comments. So, what are Biden’s odds? He entered the race as an instant front-runner and he’s already leading in early polls. But as a white man in his late 70s, Biden’s test will be whether his popularity can outweigh the party’s thirst for generational change.
“That was huge,” Ms. Boxer said.
She and other Democrats also say that Mr. Biden’s résumé and experience make him one of the party’s strongest contenders to unseat Mr. Trump. They said the totality of Mr. Biden’s work in the Senate and as chairman of the committee needs to be given its due for his handling of multiple confirmations and the passage of the Violence Against Women Act.
“There is a lot more to talk about in Joe’s tenure on the Judiciary Committee,” said Christopher J. Dodd, a longtime Senate colleague of Mr. Biden’s from Connecticut.
Allies of Mr. Biden’s had long been aware he needed to take steps to ease the tension over the Thomas hearings if Mr. Biden ran for president, and they had urged him well before now to reach out to Ms. Hill, particularly after the Kavanaugh hearings. He has been reluctant to show contrition, but the pressure increased after new questions were raised about his sensitivity toward women.
The 1991 hearings were a surreal spectacle, as senators prodded an obviously uncomfortable Ms. Hill through awkward testimony about penis size, pubic hair and a pornographic film star known as Long Dong Silver — shocking public discourse at the time. But even before the hearings began, Ms. Hill said, she was “already disappointed” in Mr. Biden.
She said she would like sexual harassment and gender violence to be elevated as issues during the Democratic presidential primary, and wants to hear what all of the candidates — including Mr. Biden — will do about it.
Whoever Democrats choose as their nominee must be able to distinguish himself or herself from Mr. Trump on these issues, Ms. Hill said. But given his history, she was asked, does she think it will be difficult for Mr. Biden to do that?
