White evangelicals are tired of letting their fear of outsiders outweigh their duties as Christians.
Mr. Cross is a Southern Baptist minister.
MONTGOMERY, Ala. — When we think about where immigrants head once they arrive in the United States, we usually imagine them piling into border states like Texas and urban areas along the coast. And many do.
But many others are headed to the Southeast: A recent analysis showed that a significant number of Guatemalans move to central Alabama, while Muscle Shoals, in the state’s northwest corner, is a popular destination for El Salvadorans. The state’s total immigrant population nearly quadrupled from 43,500 in 2000 to 169,000 in 2017.
Alabama? This reddest of red states has a reputation for hostility to immigrants — the home of former Attorney General Jeff Sessions and the infamous HB 56, one of the harshest anti-immigrant laws in the country. Thanks in part to his xenophobic rhetoric, Donald Trump won all 67 counties in the state’s Republican primary.
But there’s something else afoot in Alabama. Time and again during my work as a pastor, I have encountered people with strong anti-immigrant policy positions, who nevertheless open their homes, churches, wallets and arms to immigrants in their communities.
Alabama can be a difficult place to understand, but the role of faith is clear. On policy, people may take their cues from anywhere — their party, their president, Fox News. But in their daily lives, their religious beliefs are their guide.
Increasingly, I see people struggling with the tension between their political views and their faith. They’re not about to change their politics; Alabama isn’t turning blue. At the same time, many say they have erred in politicizing their faith. Alabama evangelicals who love and welcome immigrants seem to consciously make a decision to not start with politics.
I saw a similar approach at Faith Community Church in Enterprise, near the Florida line. The church works with some 100 families from Mexico, Guatemala, Honduras and other Latin American countries, many who came to work in nearby poultry plants and in the agriculture industry. Two of its volunteers, Brenda Hemp and Brenda Harris, both retired, tutor children on Wednesday nights.
Eastside Baptist Church, located in Union Springs, an old cotton town around 45 miles southeast of Montgomery, began reaching out to the town’s immigrant community eight years ago, providing tutoring, mentoring and other assistance. Gene Bridgman, the pastor, told me that it all started when a woman in the congregation brought by 10 children whose families came from southern Mexico, part of a large influx of agricultural workers. She was already doing what she could to help them — and soon the rest of the church was, too.
What gives me hope is that this openness isn’t just on the individual or congregational level; it is spreading across communities, as their faith overtakes their fear.
Bruce Smithhart, a retired prison guard and veteran, said: “The Union Springs economy depends on immigrants. Immigrants are why Union Springs is as good as it is.” Everyone I talked to from the church agreed.
Brad Williams, pastor of New Covenant Baptist Church in Albertville, northeast of Birmingham, says that the town’s Latino immigrant population has gone from practically zero in the 1990s to nearly 40 percent today. At first, he said, residents reacted negatively, but the animosity has dissipated.
I often ask evangelicals I know how they square their openness to immigrants in their communities with their support for tougher actions along the border. I frequently hear some version of: “I want a secure border and don’t want people coming here illegally, but I don’t think we should treat these people poorly and run them down. They work hard and I respect that.” For them, the answer involves upholding the law without dehumanizing their neighbors.
And of course, regardless of how an immigrant got there, many people believe their faith compels them to welcome them into their communities.
But I also see things changing. Politics operates downstream from culture; it lags behind. And I believe that the groundswell of welcome, love and acceptance developing in Alabama’s evangelical churches may herald, if nothing else, an eagerness for compassionate compromise on one of the most divisive issues of our day.
Alan Cross is a Southern Baptist minister and writer.