Women of color are an increasingly powerful voting bloc and an essential part of any winning Democratic coalition. But presidential candidates rarely speak directly to them.
Enter the She the People Presidential Forum, hosted in Houston on Wednesday by the political group She the People. Eight of the 19 Democratic candidates spoke at the event, which was billed as the first presidential forum for women of color and drew an audience of more than 1,000 people. The topics ranged from voting rights to health care, and the questions came exclusively from women of color — who make up about one-fifth of the primary electorate and more in some key states, said Aimee Allison, the group’s founder and president.
Senators Cory Booker, Kamala Harris, Amy Klobuchar and Bernie Sanders all spoke, as did Representative Tulsi Gabbard, former Representative Beto O’Rourke, and the former housing secretary Julián Castro. But the star of the afternoon was Senator Elizabeth Warren, who received a standing ovation and was singled out by multiple attendees afterward. They cited the specificity and thoroughness of Ms. Warren’s answers — a hallmark of her campaign — starting from the first question, which concerned maternal mortality.
After noting that maternal mortality is increasing in the United States and that black women are three to four times more likely than white women to die in childbirth, Ms. Warren described a plan to tie hospitals’ reimbursements to their patient outcomes.
Ms. Allison praised Mr. Castro, too, for the specificity of his remarks. Mr. Castro — who began by pointing out, to laughter, that the organizers had mistakenly used a photo of his twin brother, Representative Joaquin Castro, in the program — called for property tax relief and more affordable housing to protect people of color in gentrifying neighborhoods. He also discussed universal prekindergarten, a major element of his platform.
Mr. Sanders, who is polling well ahead of any of the other candidates at Wednesday’s event, received a mixed reception.
Ms. Salem said she saw him as authentic, contrasting him and Ms. Warren to several of the other candidates, who she said seemed to be reading from a playbook on “how to speak on issues that are important to women of color.” But after an enthusiastic greeting, Mr. Sanders seemed to lose the crowd somewhat. He did not discuss many policy details, and when asked what he would do for women of color as president, he talked instead about helping marginalized groups in general.
Ms. Klobuchar, also a former prosecutor, was asked about a different element of law enforcement: police killings of black people. After saying that she had supported the prosecution of the officer who killed Philando Castile in Minnesota, her home state, she called for more funding for police training; said police departments and grand juries should “reflect the communities that we serve”; and argued that police departments should not be able to run the investigations of their own officers.
Ms. Allison praised that answer, but added that Ms. Klobuchar had seemed “unprepared” for one question that every candidate was asked: With so many candidates to choose from, why should women of color choose you?
Mr. Booker, who was the first candidate to speak, received his biggest applause for noting that climate change is already disproportionately affecting poor communities and people of color. He also denounced President Trump’s attacks toward Representative Ilhan Omar, one of the first Muslim women in Congress, who has reported an increase in death threats since Mr. Trump began targeting her.
“What Donald Trump has been saying about her is reprehensible, it is trafficking in Islamophobia, and it should be condemned by everyone,” Mr. Booker said, adding that the president’s language was fueling the far-right attacks that have been the most common type of terrorism in the United States since 9/11.
As the last segment — Ms. Warren’s — wrapped up, the moderators brought up something of an elephant in the 2020 room: the sense among some Democrats, after the experience of 2016, that Americans aren’t ready to elect a woman.
