In an early test case of the limits of disciplinary action in the #MeToo era, an arbitrator has ruled that New York City Ballet overstepped when it fired two principal male dancers accused of sharing sexually explicit photos of female dancers, the company said Friday.
Mr. Catazaro said in a statement that he was “grateful and relieved that the arbitrator has found the New York City Ballet’s abrupt termination of my contract to be wrongful and unjust,” but that he had decided to continue his dance career elsewhere.
The news of the ruling, and the imminent return of Mr. Ramasar, was greeted with shock by some dancers, according to two women in the company who were granted anonymity to describe sensitive workplace issues.
The case upended City Ballet, one of the world’s premier dance companies, and became a test of how performing arts organizations — and the unions representing their artists — balance the need to maintain safe workplaces with the contractual rights of workers.
The firings of Mr. Catazaro and Mr. Ramasar were challenged by their union, the American Guild of Musical Artists. The arbitrator’s decisions in their cases — which were not released publicly — will be closely watched by other institutions. The New York Philharmonic is currently in arbitration with two musicians that it fired before the beginning of the season after accusing them of sexual misconduct, which they denied. And the conductor James Levine, who was fired by the Metropolitan Opera over allegations of sexual misconduct, which he has denied, is suing the opera company for breach of contract and defamation.
City Ballet said in a statement that the arbitrator had ruled that while the company was “justified in disciplining the two men, suspension was the appropriate punishment for their actions and termination was too severe.” It was directed to offer both men their jobs back as principal dancers, the top rank at the company. The company did not make its new artistic director, Jonathan Stafford, who had helped make the decision to fire the dancers, available for comment.
Her suit, which accused City Ballet of condoning a “fraternity-like atmosphere,” did not accuse Mr. Catazaro or Mr. Ramasar of sharing material related to her, but said that they had shared sexually explicit texts containing nude images of other women affiliated with the company or the school.
A lawyer for Ms. Waterbury, Jordan K. Merson, noted Friday that the arbitrator’s ruling was decided upon different criteria and evidence than his pending lawsuit.
City Ballet initially moved to suspend Mr. Catazaro and Mr. Ramasar, but after women in the company learned the details of what they were accused of, some approached management and said that they would be uncomfortable continuing to dance with them — especially in ballet, an art form where the partnering can be intimate. City Ballet reconsidered and fired them, saying that while their behavior had been “personal, off-hours and off-site,” it had violated “the norms of conduct” that the company expects. Then the union challenged their firings.
