The investment in Big Zodiac seems … preordained.
As an Aquarius, David Birnbaum is naturally skeptical of astrology. But as an investor, he has zero doubts about the business potential of the $2.1 billion “mystical services market.” It’s an area that he has been trying, unsuccessfully, to invest in for nearly two decades.
Mr. Birnbaum’s decision to back a horoscope company through Five Four Ventures, the incubator he runs, “gets a lot of grins” from people in the finance world, he said. But they get it. Astrology is having a cultural moment, and for investors, that translates to dollar signs.
In recent years astrology traded its psychedelic new-wave stigma for modern Instagrammy witch vibes, and those vibes are very popular with millennial women. This means there’s money to be made. Start-ups — professional, non-shady ones with interesting business models — are bubbling up, eagerly raising funding from people like Mr. Birnbaum.
A few weeks after Sanctuary became available for download, Co-Star, an app that lets people download and compare their birth charts, raised just over $5 million in funding from the Silicon Valley venture capital firms Maveron and Aspect Ventures, as well as 14W, based in New York. Co-Star’s website promotes the fact that astrology allows “irrationality to invade our techno-rationalist ways of living.” The app has been downloaded more than three million times. Its Instagram account has more than 400,000 followers.
A third app called Pattern is spreading among finance and Hollywood types; it is founded by Lisa Donovan, the co-founder of Maker Studios, which sold to Disney for $675 million. Ms. Donovan said she hasn’t raised a formal round of outside funding yet.
Ms. Guler, a Scorpio with Cancer rising and moon in Leo, believes Co-Star can be “really big.” Bigger than the dozens of horoscope blogs or online shops selling crystals and tarot cards. Maybe even bigger than meditation apps, one of which was recently valued at $1 billion by investors.
Meditation, Ms. Guler said, is an antisocial way of interacting with the world. She views astrology as a form of collective wellness, with Co-Star helping people relate to each other based on star signs. Another big difference between astrology and meditation’s practitioners: Astrologers are not allergic to making money.
Anarghya Vardhana, a partner at Maveron and a Libra, said Co-Star has the potential to be as big as Spotify, the music streaming app worth $24 billion, or Tinder, the ubiquitous dating app owned by Match Group.
“It probably has this aura of being unscientific or whatever,” Ms. Vardhana said. But Ms. Guler “did a really good job of understanding all of that and rooting it in as much science as possible.” Co-Star promotes its use of artificial intelligence and data from NASA to track movements of the stars.
Ms. Guler emailed a university psychology program asking if they’d take M.R.I. scans of people while using the app to learn about how people are reacting to it. She got no response. “Having money will help with that,” she said.
“What’s better than something that is basically a story about you?” Mr. Birnbaum said.
President Trump’s election inspired Ms. Guler to leave her work in fashion media and create Co-Star. “I was like, ‘We gotta figure out something more meaningful than what we are doing,” she said. The role social media played in the election — and how “it is changing how we operate as humans in the world” was a part of her concern, Ms. Guler said.
Investors see other trends feeding into astrology’s resurgence, Ms. Vardhana said. People are seeking smaller, specialized communities online, while participation in organized religion is declining. Millennials (and the rest of us) are lonely and want community, no matter how many followers we have on social media. Why wouldn’t we turn to the stars and moons and planets and houses of the horoscope?
A few minutes into my reading on Sanctuary’s app, Ms. Kelly, my on-demand astrologer, asked me if her assessment of my birth chart rang true. According to her interpretation, last year was a very important year for me to redefine my values. As a Libra rising, my relationships are very important to me, she noted. And in the next few weeks, I should put myself out in the world to make connections :).
“Sure!” I typed into the app. It was just vague enough that if I did a little mental backbend, I could find examples to support her conclusions. I felt hesitant to share anything too personal about myself with a stranger until I remembered that by entering the date, city and precise time of day I was born, I had already bared my soul, astrologically speaking.
The apps create a shortcut to intimacy. Armed with purported knowledge of your peers’ personalities, conversations can skip over the polite get-to-know-you small talk and dive right into the ancestral trauma. In that way it doesn’t even matter that the science is actually fake. It creates a self-fulfilling prophecy where perceived intimacy leads to real intimacy. Later, when I interviewed Ms. Kelly, she mentioned that this was a good story for me, a Pisces, to be doing.
