Opinion|Should the U.S. Revive Nuclear Energy?
Should the U.S. Revive Nuclear Energy?
Readers discuss an article arguing that it’s the best way to “save the world” from climate change.
Will it take another Chernobyl or Fukushima, possibly in an American city, to quiet the disinformation coming from nuclear activists? What the world needs is energy that is both carbon-free and radiation-free. Those of us who live near a failed nuclear power plant know the truth: Nuclear power is by far the most expensive, the most dangerous, the most unreliable and the most environmentally unfriendly form of energy production.
The authors write: “Today, renewables work only with fossil-fuel backup.” How am I going to break this news to the batteries that are handily backing up our solar array? As a dry run for hurricane season, I turned off the utility power to our house for a week. We lived our normal life, running the central air-conditioner, charging our electric car, and doing a lot of laundry with the electric washer and dryer. Some days were sunny, some were cloudy, but we never ran out of power.
The writer is the mayor of South Miami.
I recently retired after working more than 40 years in the nuclear power industry. I was involved in the design, licensing, construction, operation and decommissioning of nuclear power plants. The points made are well articulated and reasonable. Unfortunately, these are the same messages that have been repeated for the past decades.
The United States’ nuclear power plant supply chain has been deteriorating for years because of the lack of new reactor orders. What is needed is a national energy policy that designates nuclear power as a strategic energy source. It deserves the same commitment that the Apollo program did, from conception to fulfillment. We just need the will to make it work.
I am surprised the authors downplayed the problem of nuclear waste. “Over time” it becomes less radioactive? That time period can be tens of thousands of years. Also, countries throughout Europe are switching away from nuclear to renewable energy.
Still, the authors make an interesting case for nukes.
I will support nuclear power the day after the Price-Anderson Nuclear Industries Indemnity Act is repealed. If insurance company actuaries consider nuclear power to be so dangerous that they cannot compute premiums that the industry can afford, then that industry is not economically viable. If the government (i.e., taxpayers) has to cover the industry with catastrophic insurance, then the government should own the reactors and provide nonprofit energy.
We were lucky at Three Mile Island. We were minutes away from a complete meltdown that given the plant’s location would have killed thousands and done billions in damage. Investigations of Three Mile Island showed that, like the Deepwater Horizon disaster, extremely dangerous processes cannot be allowed to remain in control of people whose first responsibility is profit or return to shareholders.
Finally, an evidence- and reality-based solution to climate change. Thank you. It will take a massive educational campaign to overcome the public’s irrational fears.
