That’s because this five-day summer camp is held almost entirely in Hupa, the native language of the roughly 4,000-member Hoopa Valley Tribe that mostly lives in that part of the state.
As the number of languages spoken globally is in steep decline, it’s a goal shared by an increasing number of indigenous communities seeking to maintain a core part of their culture, inextricably tied to their history and way of life.
“We are facing a really interesting chapter of human history where people are going against the tide to keep their language alive or bring back languages that are dormant,” said Gabriela Pérez Báez, a professor of linguistics at the University of Oregon.
In surveys of about 245 language revitalization programs that Dr. Báez, director of the university’s Language Revitalization Lab, conducted in 2016 and 2017, more than half began after the year 2000. About 30 percent started after 2010.
“It just goes through the roof,” she said.
The United Nations General Assembly has declared 2019 the International Year of the Indigenous Language in an attempt to raise “global attention” to the peril facing indigenous languages, as well as a way of celebrating revitalization efforts like those in the Hoopa Valley Tribe, said Boyan Radoykov, section chief for universal access and preservation in Unesco’s knowledge societies division.
The discovery of gold in the mid-1850s brought white people — and violent conflict — to the area. In 1893, the Bureau of Indian Affairs created the Hoopa Valley Indian School, where, as at other such boarding schools around the country, white teachers burned traditional clothing, gave children Anglo names and forbade them to speak the language of their parents.
For more than six decades, the government tried to “civilize” and “Christianize” Hupa children, according to the book “Our Home Forever: The Hupa Indians of Northern California” by Byron Nelson Jr.
“Some would say that whenever they try and speak the language, they could taste the soap in their mouths,” said Daniel Kaufman, a director of the Endangered Language Alliance, a nonprofit group in New York.
Ms. Chase’s immersion camp began in the summer of 2017. She had graduated from Columbia University in 2014, where she majored in Native American studies and linguistics, after growing up on the reservation. She is enrolled as a Hoopa Valley Tribe citizen.
As part of a senior thesis at Columbia, she held a “bare-bones” version of the immersion camp. Then, in 2017, after receiving a $10,000 grant from a nonprofit organization called Running Strong for American Indian Youth, she started her first summer camp, with about 15 children, which ran for four days. In 2018, there were about 20 children, and the camp expanded to five days. Ms. Chase hopes to eventually start her own school.
There are precedents showing that a small effort like Ms. Chase’s can have a large impact. Two of the most prominent language revitalization efforts, of Maori in New Zealand and of Hawaiian, started in a similar fashion.
In New Zealand, activism by community groups led to the kohanga reo movement. Beginning in 1982, it immersed Maori preschoolers in the Maori language, among other efforts to recover the language. Maori became an official language of New Zealand in 1987.
Today, indigenous people are increasingly embracing the language. The New Zealand government says it wants more than 20 percent of the country’s population to speak basic Maori by 2040 and has pledged to provide Maori lessons in all schools by 2025.
The Myaamia Center was founded in 2001. It’s a partnership between the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, where the Myaamia people were relocated, and the university, and today it develops curriculums for tribal youth programs, trains educators and researches tribal history.
For Ms. Chase, it’s about a resurgence of a way of life damaged by colonialism.
To Ms. Davis’s chagrin, when Grace decides to defy her parents, she even says “no” in Hupa.
