WASHINGTON — The powerful chairman of the House Judiciary Committee threatened on Sunday to subpoena Attorney General William P. Barr if Mr. Barr refuses to testify this week, a move that could lead to a major escalation of the long-running feud between the White House and congressional Democrats over testimony and access to documents.
The threat by the chairman, Representative Jerrold Nadler, Democrat of New York, came on the eve of Democrats’ return to Washington after a two-week congressional recess that has been dominated by questions about the special counsel’s report. Mr. Barr is scheduled to come before Mr. Nadler’s committee on Thursday to testify about it.
But Mr. Barr and Democrats are at loggerheads over the Democrats’ proposed format for questioning him, and now the much-anticipated hearing is in doubt. The dispute spilled out into the open on Sunday when Democrats revealed that Mr. Barr was threatening to skip the session if they did not change their terms. Mr. Nadler said they have no intention of doing so.
Since the report of the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, was released this month, establishing no conspiracy between Mr. Trump’s campaign and Russia but detailing almost a dozen times Mr. Trump tried to thwart investigators, the president’s allies have seized on it as vindication and Democrats as an investigative road map.
While Democrats remain deeply divided over whether to pursue impeachment, party leaders agree that they should use hearings to build a case on live television and see where it takes them. Mr. Barr’s testimony is part of that plan.
But the hearing comes as President Trump is stiffening his resolve to fight Democrats at every turn — a battle that could lead to constitutional clashes in the courts. “We’re fighting all the subpoenas,” the president declared last week.
White House lawyers have already indicated that they planned to tell the former White House counsel Donald F. McGahn II and other former officials not to comply with subpoenas for their testimonies. The White House also initially blocked a former official from answering questions about granting security clearances to officials, including to Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser.
And last week, the Treasury Department refused to turn over Mr. Trump’s tax returns before a deadline set by House Democrats.
At issue in the case of Mr. Barr is Democrats’ insistence that in addition to the usual five-minute rounds of questioning from lawmakers, the attorney general take some questions from staff lawyers during a 30-minute round, which would allow for more follow-up from interviewers who are often more skilled than members of Congress.
Mr. Barr objects to that format. People on both sides said talks over the shape of the hearing would continue on Monday, but neither side planned to back down.
But Representative Jamie Raskin, Democrat of Maryland and a member of the Judiciary Committee, said Congress must be able to set the terms.
Mr. Nadler is hardly the only Democratic chairman pushing back. Over the weekend, Representative Elijah E. Cummings, Democrat of Maryland and the chairman of the House Oversight and Reform Committee, admonished the former White House head of personnel security, Carl Kline, for his failure to comply with a subpoena ordering him to show up for a deposition last week.
The panel wants to question Mr. Kline about the accusations made by a whistle-blower, Tricia Newbold, who has told the committee that senior Trump administration officials had issued security clearances to at least 25 officials whose applications were denied by career staff members who cited “disqualifying issues” that posed possible national security risks. The White House instructed Mr. Kline not to cooperate.
Representative Jim Jordan of Ohio, the top Republican on the oversight panel, has since intervened and worked to arrange for Mr. Kline to testify voluntarily. In his letter, Mr. Cummings scheduled a voluntary hearing for Wednesday, but made clear that he would not allow Mr. Jordan or the White House to set the parameters for questions.
That was a sentiment Mr. Nadler echoed in his response to Mr. Barr. The attorney general is scheduled to appear on Capitol Hill twice this week; on Wednesday, he is to come before the Republican-led Senate Judiciary Committee. But he is almost certain to face a tougher time in the Democrat-led House.
Democrats are up in arms over what they regard as his failure to accurately portray the Mueller report.
Both in a four-page written statement summarizing the report and at a news conference before releasing it to the public, Mr. Barr emphasized that Mr. Mueller had found no evidence that the Trump campaign had conspired with Russia to interfere in the 2016 elections, while playing down the findings that suggested the president may have obstructed justice. During the news conference, Mr. Barr repeatedly said there was “no collusion” — the president’s favorite phrase in defending himself.
In addition to his opposition to being questioned by staff lawyers, Mr. Barr is balking at a plan by Mr. Nadler for committee members to question the attorney general behind closed doors about redacted sections of the report. Justice Department officials and Mr. Barr argue that closed-door testimony rarely remains private because Congress is rife with leaks.
Mr. Barr has instead told members of the House and Senate Judiciary Committees that they could come to the department to read the redacted sections of the report, except for material related to grand jury investigations.
On Sunday, a spokesman for House Judiciary Committee Republicans said that it was improper to have staff lawyers ask questions in place of committee members and raised concerns about the precedent for doing so.
Although allowing staff members to question witnesses is unusual, the committee has permitted it on several occasions in the past, under both Democratic and Republican majorities, according to a spokesman for Mr. Nadler, Daniel Schwarz. This includes during public hearings and private transcribed interviews, like the impeachment inquiries into Presidents Richard M. Nixon and Bill Clinton, and the Republican-led investigation into the F.B.I.’s handling of Hillary Clinton’s emails.
There is also precedent for having staff lawyers interview cabinet secretaries, Mr. Schwarz said. During the joint House and Senate Hearings on the Iran-contra scandal in 1987, committee staff members questioned both Attorney General Edwin Meese III and Secretary of State George P. Shultz. And in 1973, committee staff members questioned James Schlesinger, the C.I.A. director, during a House Armed Services subcommittee inquiry into the alleged involvement of the C.I.A. in the Watergate scandal.