President Trump on Friday announced a new wireless spectrum auction intended to speed the rollout of the next generation of wireless communications networks, a technology the administration views as critical to winning an economic war with China.
Yet Mr. Trump has so far remained silent on whether the United States would issue an order essentially banning Chinese firms like Huawei from building those networks.
“Secure 5G networks will absolutely be a vital link to America’s prosperity and national security in the 21st century,” Mr. Trump said on Friday.
The administration has long been contemplating an executive order that would ban American telecom companies from using Huawei or other Chinese equipment when building 5G networks. But that executive order has not materialized, leading many officials and industry executives to believe the administration is holding back until the current trade negotiations with China are completed. Any move to bar Chinese firms from the United States could anger Chinese leadership.
It is possible that Mr. Trump will allow some Chinese access to the American market — despite national security concerns — in order to strike a trade deal with Xi Jinping, China’s president.
But to Mr. Trump, 5G is an election issue as much as a security issue. Speaking at the White House, surrounded by wireless company workers wearing cowboy hats and hard hats, Mr. Trump said the United States could not allow itself to be “outcompeted” in 5G networks.
The Trump administration had considered a plan that would have created national 5G networks using federal money. Mr. Trump said on Friday that that approach had been rejected and that private industry would build out the American 5G networks.
Mr. Trump also repeatedly said he would extend broadband access to rural America. “No matter where you are you will have access very quickly to 5G, and it will be a different life,” Mr. Trump said.
“From imposing tariffs on 5G equipment to alienating allies on 5G security to falling behind the rest of the world on critical mid-band spectrum, it has yet to offer a workable plan for US leadership,” she said on Twitter.
The United States has auctioned other parts of the high-band electromagnetic spectrum to firms that need to communicate to a new generation of cellphones and internet-of-things devices.
Some experts think the United States should focus more on developing midband, not high-band, spectrum. High-band allows more data, but has a much smaller range, meaning providers must build far more 5G towers. It also means a 5G system based on high-band spectrum is harder to build in rural areas.
