My usual method of packing involves reflecting on past moves and reliving the stress of each one.
Ms. Dumas is a humorist and writer.
MUNICH — After six years in Germany, we are headed back home to California, and everyone asks me if I am using the Marie Kondo method to help me pack. I am actually using the lesser-known Firoozeh Dumas method, which involves spending half of each day remembering past moves, a lifetime total of 22 on three continents, and then reliving the stress of each one.
In my family, we never complained; how can we complain about stuff when people lost loved ones? However, as an imperfect human being, I do sometimes look at my two Ikea fake Persian rugs, which spark no joy whatsoever, and long for the houseful of beautiful Persian rugs that we did not bring with us to America.
Aside from children’s artwork, photo albums and books, highlights include the oversize suitcases we brought to America when I was 7 years old. We flew Pan Am; my dad wore a three-piece suit and my mother wore a flowered dress, pantyhose and heels. Our suitcases, Louis Vuitton luggage they were not, but those powder blue Samsonites with the matching makeup case were, by 1972 Abadan standards, fancy.
When I look at them now, they remind me of how secure I felt despite the unknown journey. I knew that my father had the answer to every question I ever asked about America and even answers to questions I didn’t ask. He was always dispensing advice, wisdom he had gleaned thanks to his Fulbright scholarship to Texas A&M in 1952: Always buy the biggest car possible. Chevrolets are the best cars on the planet. No one ever regretted becoming educated. Jell-O, regardless of color, is the single most delicious dessert. Never buy a house when you can rent hassle-free. A girl without an education is always at the mercy of others. Putting ice in tea is very wrong.
Those dusty suitcases now remind me that my dad was the best ally a girl could ever have, but one who gave some really bad advice.
The beer steins are coming, too, although I have never served beer in them. How do Germans drink that much beer? I assume Germans look at Big Gulps and ask the same thing about Americans and soda.
Our youngest, now a teenager, was 7 when we moved to Germany, the same age I was when we came to America. She arrived here not speaking a word of German and now speaks it like a native. She has been my reluctant translator, just as I was for my mother. She laughs at my American accent; I used to imitate my mother’s thick Persian accent. Like me, my daughter feels that she belongs to two countries. But our parallel lives end there. She has no anxiety about moving; she doesn’t fear that while she is gone, one of her countries will change completely, basically disappearing but for her memories.
I recently found a duplicate of my brother’s robot on eBay for $2,000. Even if I could afford it, I wouldn’t buy it. It’s not the same one that he played with, the one that I took to my kindergarten class for show-and-tell and pretended was mine. After staring at it on my computer screen for the first time in almost 50 years, I realized that it’s not really the robot that I wish I had kept, but the sense of innocence and security that we felt in our home in Abadan, Iran, a place that we thought would always be there, waiting for us, just as we had left it. That permanence is something that we couldn’t pack back then, and something that I cannot pack now.
And yet somehow, I still try.
