WASHINGTON — In tightening sanctions on Iran, the Trump administration moved on Monday to isolate Tehran economically and undercut its power across the Middle East. But the clampdown has complicated relations with China at a particularly sensitive moment.
The decision to stop five of Iran’s biggest customers from buying its oil was an audacious strike at Tehran’s lifeline — one million barrels of oil exports daily, fully half of which go to China. The order was also aimed at India, Japan, South Korea and Turkey, all countries that trade robustly with the United States.
All are also partners with the United States on major security and diplomatic issues that do not involve Iran.
“We will no longer grant exemptions,” Secretary of State Mike Pompeo said in announcing that current sanctions waivers to the five nations would expire on May 2, clearing the way for American economic penalties against all companies or financial institutions that continue to take part in transactions linked to buying Iranian oil.
By withdrawing from the 2015 Iran nuclear deal, and phasing in sanctions, the Trump administration has sought to cripple the Iranian government and weaken the power of its ruling clerics. Mr. Pompeo said Iran has earned about $50 billion annually from oil sales, accounting for as much as 40 percent of government revenues.
The Iranian economy is already reeling from sanctions that have also led to a shortage in critical medicine, and Iranian-backed militias have been forced to tighten their payrolls.
By retracting its oil exemptions, the Trump administration is encroaching on China’s energy security even as Washington is trying to strike an all-important trade deal with Beijing. The United States also needs China’s help in controlling North Korea’s nuclear weapons development.
The Chinese government immediately pushed back against the decision on the waivers, although analysts said both Beijing and Washington will be careful not to jeopardize their trade talks.
Mr. Pompeo said the United States has been in “constant discussions with allies and partners” to find an alternative source of oil, including the United Arab Emirates. It is also further embracing Saudi Arabia to punish Iran but avoid damaging the global economy.
But the Trump administration’s increased coordination with Saudi Arabia, to ensure that oil markets remain fully supplied, follows persistent and bipartisan criticism in Congress of the kingdom’s human rights record, its war in Yemen and its role in the October killing of the dissident journalist Jamal Khashoggi, who was a resident of the United States.
Saudi Arabia is an avowed enemy of Iran. It has also been coordinating with Russia in recent years to manage global oil prices. Should Russia balk at increasing its own output to stymie the United States, oil prices could soar and hurt the global economy.
International oil prices, which had already climbed $20 a barrel this year, soared by 3 percent after the first reports on Sunday of the administration’s policy shift. With the summertime surge in energy use and the 2020 elections drawing closer, President Trump has railed on Twitter against higher gasoline prices that have resulted from rising oil prices. Those prices are now at roughly their highest level in six months.
Iran reacted angrily, threatening to close the Strait of Hormuz, a move that would effectively sabotage the world economy.
“In the event of any threats, we will not have the slightest hesitation to protect and defend Iran’s waterway,” said Alireza Tangsiri, the head of the Revolutionary Guards’ naval force, according to state media.
Among all of the complications, one stands out. China is Iran’s largest oil buyer and has been increasing its purchases this year, contrary to Trump administration demands that it gradually bring the imports to zero.
The United States and China have been closing in on an agreement that would cover a wide range of trade issues.
Negotiations are expected to continue over the next two weeks, first in Beijing and then in Washington, to resolve several sticking points, including removing current tariffs. If those gaps are bridged, the two sides will look to schedule a signing meeting between Mr. Trump and President Xi Jinping of China in May or June, said a person who has been briefed on the talks and spoke on the condition of anonymity to discuss them.
Any move by Beijing to keep buying Iranian oil — which analysts predicted China almost certainly will find some way to do — would force the United States to decide whether to impose sanctions on Chinese financial institutions, which are increasingly important in the worldwide economy. China could also set up a new vehicle as an alternative to using the current banking mechanisms, as the European nations have done to keep doing some business with Iran.
“Iran sanctions are going to be a big challenge for the U.S.-Chinese relationship,” said Jason Bordoff, the director of Columbia University’s Center on Global Energy Policy and a former energy adviser to President Barack Obama.
He added that if Chinese imports do not drop quickly, the American sanctions could be applied to Beijing’s central bank, the People’s Bank of China.
The United States and China are already at odds over an incendiary case involving Iran sanctions.
In January, Canadian authorities arrested a top Chinese technology executive, Meng Wanzhou, at the Vancouver airport at the request of American officials. The Justice Department is seeking her extradition to face charges of helping her company, Huawei, evade sanctions on Iran in a scheme that involved tricking American banks.
That case has been criticized by Chinese officials, who have said it is motivated purely by politics. It also heightened fury and grievances from the Chinese government over sanctions imposed by the United States on Iran in the administrations of both Mr. Obama and Mr. Trump. Chinese companies have many business ties to Iran.
The case of Ms. Meng shows how tensions over various issues could affect the trade talks. Mr. Trump has suggested he could help with Ms. Meng’s release if China cooperates in the negotiations. The oil issue could also end up as a bargaining chip in those talks.
Leaders of the other four nations are also certain to be upset by Monday’s announcement.
And India, which imports four-fifths of its oil, depends on Iran as one of its main suppliers. Monday’s decision could have an immediate effect on Indian financial markets if it causes oil prices to jump.
American officials had granted six-month oil purchase waivers last November to eight governments after imposing major sanctions on Iran. In recent weeks, they had debated whether to continue the exemptions for the five nations still buying oil from Iran.
For all of its complications with Washington, Saudi Arabia enthusiastically endorsed the end of the exceptions. The rise in global oil prices finance the kingdom’s budget and may attract international investors to its proposed initial public offering of Saudi Aramco, which has been delayed over the past year.
“Saudi Arabia will coordinate with fellow oil producers to ensure adequate supplies are available to consumers while ensuring the global oil market does not go out of balance,” said Khalid al-Falih, the Saudi minister of energy.
But some experts warned that relying on Saudi Arabia presents other threats to the stability of the Persian Gulf, including possible Iranian cyberattacks on Saudi energy facilities. “The disruption of Saudi oil production could systematically rattle markets,” according to a research note by the consultancy Eurasia Group on Monday.
Russia, which is able to deliver more oil supplies, also stands to profit. President Vladimir V. Putin of Russia said last week that he was satisfied with the rise in prices, and that it was premature to reconsider production levels for the second half of the year.
Since the administration withdrew from the Iran nuclear deal nearly one year ago, oil prices have been on an erratic ride.
Oil prices first soared to more than $85 a barrel as tensions between the United States and Iran escalated, before plunging to around $50 after the administration granted the waivers six months ago. As crude prices have rebounded since January, so have prices for American drivers at the pump.
The average price of regular gasoline nationwide has increased by 23 cents over the past month alone, to $2.84, 8 cents higher than a year ago. They are bound to go higher during the summer driving season, energy analysts said, especially if American sanctions remain against Venezuela and political crises persist in Libya, two other major oil producers.