Shane Piche raped a girl who rode his bus in upstate New York. His sentence of 10 years’ probation has prompted outrage.
He was her bus driver, ferrying her to school in Watertown, a small city in upstate New York. Then, one day last summer, having plied her with gifts and alcohol, he invited the 14-year-old to his home and raped her.
The driver, Shane Piche, 26, pleaded guilty to third-degree rape earlier this year. But instead of going to prison as the victim’s family had hoped for, Mr. Piche was sentenced on Thursday to 10 years of probation.
He was also assigned the lowest-level status on New York’s sex offender registry, according to an official with the State Supreme Court in Jefferson County. The Level 1 status is reserved for offenders with a low risk of committing another similar crime, and means that his future addresses will not be made public.
In explaining the sentence, Justice James P. McClusky said that Mr. Piche had no prior arrests and that only one victim had been involved, according to the Watertown Daily Times newspaper.
Mr. Piche was ordered not to be left alone with anyone younger than 17, and to pay $1,425 in court and other fees, according to the court official. Prosecutors had initially charged him with second-degree rape, as well as first-degree unlawfully dealing with a child and endangering the welfare of a child.
The sentence has led to angry calls to the judge’s chambers from people outraged by the sentence, which was shared widely on social media and has generated thousands of signatures on an online petition calling for the judge’s ouster.
The case in Watertown, about 70 miles north of Syracuse, also has reignited a fresh debate over the severity of punishments handed down to sex offenders.
In 2016, the former Stanford University swimmer Brock Turner was sentenced to six months in prison after having sexually assaulted an unconscious woman. The furor surrounding his case prompted nationwide demands for the resignation of the sentencing judge.
Last year, a doctor in Houston, Shafeeq Sheikh, was given 10 years of probation after raping a patient.
Susan Estrich, a professor at the University of Southern California’s law school, called it “shocking” that Mr. Piche was allowed to plead guilty to what she said were “watered-down” third-degree rape charges.
She said the plea agreement effectively blamed the 14-year-old victim. “This is the beginning of a backlash in the courts — leaning over backward to protect men,” Professor Estrich said.
Hours after Mr. Piche’s sentencing, a petition was launched on MoveOn.org to remove Justice McClusky from the bench. The judge was elected in 2011 to a 14-year term on the Supreme Court.
“Remove him from his position immediately for his blatant disregard for survivors of sexual assault,” reads the petition that by Tuesday had gathered more than 20,000 signatures.
Prosecutors had requested that Mr. Piche be assigned a Level 2 sex-offender designation, which would have meant that his future addresses would have been published on the state’s sex offender registry.
The victim’s mother had said she had been hoping that Mr. Piche would receive prison time.
Mr. Piche’s lawyer, Eric T. Swartz, could not be reached on Tuesday for comment, but he told WWNY that the sentence was just.
The maximum sentence for third-degree rape is 1 1/3 to four years in prison, according to a spokesman for the Unified Court System, Lucian Chalfen. But he said Justice McClusky was “well within” the sentencing range for the negotiated plea.
“The defendant is now a convicted sex offender who will spend the next decade on a very onerous and intrusive sex offender probation and have to register as a sex offender,” Mr. Chalfen said in a statement.
