In a remote Himalayan town in northern India, a women’s ice hockey team comes together.
LEH, India — More than 11,000 feet above sea level, a group of 30 women spread out and got to work around an open-air ice rink.
Armed with shovels, brooms made from small branches, and hockey sticks, they cleared the surface of the New Rink after an overnight snowstorm. Billowing green nets, intended to keep the sun from melting the ice, hung heavy with white powder, sagging toward the surface of the rink. The women pushed and pulled at the fabric, using their sticks to thwack the net, hoping to dislodge its frosty burden.
For 15 days, 20 national team players and 10 hopefuls trained in Leh, a remote Himalayan town of about 31,000 in the northernmost state of India. They were preparing for the Challenge Cup of Asia tournament, which was held in Abu Dhabi this week.
They dream of playing in the Olympics, but that is a long way off. The Challenge Cup, the only international competition the team has ever entered, is for countries in the lowest division of the International Ice Hockey Federation. This year India was joined by the Philippines, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates.
According to the federation, there are 311 female ice hockey players in India, the world’s second most-populous country, which has only five indoor rinks and a sports culture dominated by cricket and field hockey.
The rink where the women's national team practices is one of two that opened in the area last year. It was originally built for playing cricket in the summer.
Most of the national team players are from Leh or other parts of the Ladakh region, which is sometimes called Little Tibet. Only one player — a goalie from Mumbai — comes from a large city. The players range in age from 15 to 29, and all but two are students.
Camp has been a special experience for the team, which started competing in 2016. The players were also able to train for 20 days together in Kyrgyzstan ahead of the 2017 Challenge Cup.
The rink where they practice every day is another example of their sport’s growth. It is one of two that opened last year. The players were used to skating on frozen rivers and ponds. When Adam Sherlip, a former men’s coach who helped the women’s team, first came to the area in 2009, there were only three ice rinks and there was very little interest in hockey, he said.
Rigzin Yangdol, center, and her teammates getting ready for practice.
Before a game, face-off circles and lines were hand-painted on the ice.
A team from a local school playing a team assembled by a hotel in February at the new Army Rink. Many of the women on each squad are members of the national team.
There are hockey teams throughout Ladakh. The men’s national team, a mix of army and civilian players, is also based in Leh. A February tournament was organized by the police department and featured a women’s team from a school and another assembled by a local hotel.
Harjinder Singh, the general secretary of the Ice Hockey Association of India, said the sport was “a magnet for youth to come together,” particularly in the winter months when all roads leading in and out of Leh are closed because of snow. There is only one way to get here: by air.
At this year’s camp, the members of the women’s national team slept, ate and socialized together at a rented hostel on the outskirts of town. During their free time between morning practice and off-ice training, the women gathered around space heaters at the hostel, braiding one another’s hair, playing cards and napping. With 10 women per room, quarters were close.
Tsewang Chuskit, front, during off-ice training. Chuskit, 25, is the team captain.
Music came from their three bedrooms. One song, “The Cha Cha Shuffle,” the team first heard months earlier in Canada. The women traveled there for a hockey festival organized by Hayley Wickenheiser, a four-time Olympic gold medalist. The players rubbed shoulders with Wayne Gretzky, Connor McDavid and Jujhar Khaira, the N.H.L.’s only current player of Indian descent.
In 2017 Wickenheiser saw a YouTube video of the women playing hockey with the world’s tallest mountains looming above them. In January 2018 she traveled to Ladakh with Andrew Ference, a retired N.H.L. defenseman who is the league’s director of social impact.
“It’s like playing hockey in heaven,” Wickenheiser said.
The Canadians brought 100 bags of hockey gear, 25 of them coming from the National Hockey League Players’ Association.
Players taking a nap between morning practice and off-ice training. The 30 women attending the camp shared floor space in three bedrooms at a hostel on the outskirts of town.
The women’s team relies on outside organizations and crowdsourcing for equipment and funding. Because ice hockey is not played in many parts of India, the government has not recognized it as an official national sport, and thus does not provide significant financial support.
“We are in the infant stage right now,” said Rinchen Dolma, 28, a forward.
None of the athletes, trainers or coaches on the team are compensated. The Ladakh Women’s Ice Hockey Foundation and the Ice Hockey Association of India paid for room and board at the hostel and for a 10-day coaching camp with 130 girls in an area outside Leh. Another foundation, run by Sherlip, got sideboards for the New Rink from a club in Austria.
With so few indoor rinks, India’s hockey season is almost entirely dependent on the weather.
Dorjay Dolma, known as Didi, putting on makeup before practice.
Diskit Angmo trying to heat up sunscreen in a hostel bedroom. Despite the cold weather, the sun is strong and, at elevation, can quickly damage skin.
Tsetan Dolma, center, and Dechen Dolker, right, dancing with teammates at a local school after a game.
Noor Jahan, 28, the team’s goalie, said the most important advancement would be getting a rink where players could train year-round.
Impassible roads in the winter affect the team’s diet; produce and fresh meat are hard to find. Until spring comes, the community — and the team — eats mainly lentils and rice. Skarma Lotus, a volunteer strength and conditioning coach, bemoaned not being able to introduce more protein into the player’s diets. “One egg is all that we can give to them,” he said.
India hoped to win the Challenge Cup, but lost its first two games. The women ended their tournament by defeating Kuwait, 11-0, on Thursday. It was their third win ever in international competition.
Instead, the dream she sees is coaching an Olympic team in the future.
Because ice hockey is not recognized as an official national sport by the Indian government, the team relies on outside support. A foundation bought sideboards for this rink from a club in Austria.
Salim Valji contributed reporting from Montreal.