Mr. Trump’s latest invective toward the local leaders of an island devastated by a hurricane in September 2017 came in a torrent of tweets, which began on Monday night and spilled into Tuesday morning. Mr. Trump was reacting after the Senate on Monday blocked billions of dollars in disaster aid for Midwestern states, in part because Democrats said a proposed $600 million in nutritional assistance to Puerto Rico fell short of its needs.
“Puerto Rico got far more money than Texas & Florida combined, yet their government can’t do anything right, the place is a mess — nothing works,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter. He also stated, incorrectly, that Puerto Rico had received $91 billion in aid from the federal government.
In fact, FEMA and other agencies have so far distributed $11.2 billion in aid to Puerto Rico, according to the Office of Management and Budget. Some $41 billion in aid has been allocated, while $91 billion is the budget office’s estimate of how much the island could receive over the next two decades.
Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló of Puerto Rico, a Democrat, responded to Mr. Trump in a tweet of his own on Tuesday. “Mr. President, once again, we are not your adversaries, we are your citizens,” Mr. Rosselló wrote.
Mr. Trump has long been sensitive when it comes to the subject of Puerto Rico, where the federal government’s response to Hurricane Maria was widely criticized as too slow. Aides and allies said Mr. Trump had vented privately that Puerto Ricans had complained too much, and he had also noted privately that Hurricane Maria, which killed 2,975 people as a result of the storm and its effects, was not as bad as Hurricane Katrina, in which fewer people — 1,833 — were killed.
Mr. Trump has long hit back at Ms. Cruz, who during the disaster became the most outspoken critic of the federal response.
On Tuesday, Mr. Trump seemed to imply in his tweets that Puerto Rico was not part of the United States, noting that local elected officials “only take from USA.” Hogan Gidley, a White House spokesman, seemed to underscore the view in the White House that Puerto Ricans were not Americans when he twice referred to the island as “that country” during an appearance on MSNBC.
Mr. Trump’s apparent disdain for the island’s leadership has led to a breakdown of communication between local officials and the White House.
For weeks, Mr. Rosselló has asked the White House for a private meeting with Mr. Trump to lay out the island’s case for why it desperately needs federal funds for rebuilding after Hurricane Maria. But Mr. Rosselló’s request has gone unanswered, and he has tried instead to communicate with the president publicly, saying in cable news interviews, in official appearances and on Twitter that he fears Mr. Trump has been misled about Puerto Rico’s needs.
Mr. Rosselló’s fight may be an uphill battle with a president who has made it clear that he views more federal aid to Puerto Rico as throwing money away. Mr. Trump’s advisers also view the pleas from local officials as part of a campaign to shift the blame for what they view as severe mismanagement of the supplies and money sent after the storm.
People familiar with Mr. Trump’s thinking said he was skeptical that additional aid would not be used to pay down Puerto Rico’s debt. The acting White House chief of staff, Mick Mulvaney, who has made it clear that he believes Puerto Rico will need to find its own way out of the debt crisis, is believed to be encouraging the president’s negative view of the island.
The governor also has bigger issues to deal with at home: The resignations of two power players in his cabinet became public late on Monday. Julia Keleher, the education secretary, and Héctor M. Pesquera, the public safety secretary, had been among the least popular members of Mr. Rosselló’s government. Their departures dominated the headlines in the local news media, which made little reference to what is widely seen here as yet another episode of presidential bluster.
That is not to say Puerto Ricans necessarily disagree with Mr. Trump’s criticism of the commonwealth’s leaders, even if many locals dislike the president himself, or the disdainful way he sometimes refers to the island.
At a bakery in the comfortable San Juan neighborhood of Ocean Park on Tuesday, the morning crowd was hardly abuzz about Mr. Trump’s comments, though people had noticed them.
Politically, Mr. Rosselló is in an unenviable position experienced by all of his predecessors: Puerto Rico cannot get funding even for its food stamp program without approval from Congress, but it has no congressional representation to make its case in Washington. (Representative Jenniffer González-Colón, a Republican, has no vote in the House.) None of the previous governors, however, had to deal with the dire consequences of a devastating hurricane in the middle of a government bankruptcy.
Mr. Rosselló, who is up for re-election next year, has faced intense criticism on the island for trying to work cooperatively with Mr. Trump even as the president was repeatedly deriding Puerto Rican leaders.
Last week, the governor amped up his language against Mr. Trump, appearing to refer to him as a “bully” in an interview with CNN.
He later characterized his comments as a metaphor.
Mr. Trump has refrained from going after Mr. Rosselló by name, preferring to focus his attention Ms. Cruz, his political nemesis since her outspoken comments criticizing the Trump administration’s failure to provide swift and meaningful help in the weeks after Hurricane Maria.
Ms. Cruz recently declared her candidacy for governor. She and several other candidates are hoping to unseat Mr. Rosselló in 2020. He is a supporter of Puerto Rican statehood; she is not.
Calling Puerto Rican leaders “corrupt” reflects poorly on Mr. Trump’s own administration, she added.
