For nearly two years, Minneapolis waited for answers about the fatal police shooting of Justine Ruszczyk, an unarmed woman who had called 911 seeking help. There was no video of the shooting. There was no audio. And the officer involved, Mohamed Noor, would not answer investigators’ questions.
But on Tuesday, after a monthlong trial in downtown Minneapolis, a jury handed down a verdict that is exceedingly rare in police shooting cases: Mr. Noor was guilty of murder.
The shooting of Ms. Ruszczyk, 40, set off outrage as far away as Australia, where she had lived for most of her life, and forced changes in the policies and leadership of the Minneapolis Police Department. The trial drew intense attention among Minnesota’s Somali-American residents, many of whom wondered whether Mr. Noor, who was born in Somalia, would be treated fairly.
No other Minnesota officer has been convicted in recent decades in a fatal on-duty shooting.
Jurors convicted Mr. Noor of third-degree murder, which carries a maximum sentence of 25 years in prison, and second-degree manslaughter, which can lead to as many as 10 years in prison. Under Minnesota sentencing guidelines, he will likely face several years in prison, but far fewer than the maximum.
Mr. Noor was acquitted of second-degree murder, which carries a stiffer penalty.
“This is a tragic shooting that did not have to happen and should not have happened,” said Mike Freeman, Hennepin County’s elected prosecutor, after the verdict was announced.
From the start, the case had been a mystery. Mr. Noor, who was later fired by the Police Department, declined to speak with investigators about why he opened fire a few minutes before midnight on July 15, 2017. At trial, Mr. Noor, speaking publicly about the shooting for the first time, said he feared for his life when he saw Ms. Ruszczyk approaching his cruiser and made a split-second decision to shoot.
“That night there was a tragic lapse of care and complete disregard for the sanctity of life,” Ms. Ruszczyk’s fiancé, Don Damond, told reporters after the verdict.
Ms. Ruszczyk had called 911 twice that night to report what she thought was a sexual assault in the alley behind her home. Peter Wold, a lawyer for Mr. Noor, acknowledged that Ms. Ruszczyk, who was about to get married and sometimes used her fiancé’s surname, had in fact posed no threat. She had been holding a glittery cellphone and standing outside a rolled-down window of the squad car when she was shot.
Mr. Wold said it was a tragedy, but not a crime.
American police officers have wide discretion to use lethal force, and few are ever charged in on-duty shootings. Of those who stand trial, many are acquitted, though there have been recent exceptions in Illinois, Florida and Texas.
In Minnesota, Ms. Ruszczyk’s death stoked outrage and reinvigorated debate about how officers use force — a familiar topic following protests over the deadly police shootings of Jamar Clark and Philando Castile. In Ms. Ruszczyk’s neighborhood, a safe, affluent area near the southwest corner of Minneapolis, the shooting has harmed relations with the police.
After Ms. Ruszczyk’s death, the Minneapolis police chief was forced out, and the mayor was voted out of office. The Police Department also revamped its body camera policy: Both Mr. Noor and his partner, Officer Matthew Harrity, had been wearing cameras that night, but neither officer had them turned on at the time of the shooting.
Mr. Freeman, the prosecutor, said there were errors by the Minneapolis police and a state law enforcement agency in the early stages of the investigation. John Ruszczyk, Justine’s father, said Tuesday that he felt the conviction came “despite the active resistance” of some in law enforcement.
Medaria Arradondo, who became the Minneapolis police chief after the shooting, offered “sincere apologies” to the Ruszcyzk family in a statement issued after the verdict. “As chief, I will ensure that the M.P.D. learns from this case and we will be in spaces to listen, learn and do all we can to help our communities in healing,” he said.
In some ways, the case was an outlier. While much of the national debate about police shootings had focused on young, African-American men being killed by white officers, Ms. Ruszczyk was a white woman, and Mr. Noor is Somali-American. During the trial, Mr. Noor’s lawyers detailed his journey from a farm in Somalia to a refugee camp in Kenya to a new home in Minneapolis.
Since the shooting, some activists and members of Minnesota’s large Somali community have questioned whether Mr. Noor was treated differently by prosecutors than a white officer would have been.
Ms. Ruszczyk, a meditation coach and a dual citizen of Australia and the United States, had made her own journey to Minneapolis. She moved to the city a couple of years before the shooting to live with her fiancé and had been building a small business. When she called 911 that night, her wedding was just weeks away.
