President Trump on Friday targeted Representative Ilhan Omar for remarks she made during a speech on civil rights and Muslims in America with a graphic video featuring the burning World Trade Center towers and other images from Sept. 11, 2001, that he tweeted to millions of his followers.
The Twitter post from the president stoked and amplified a controversy that has been a focus of conservative news outlets, which have sought to elevate Ms. Omar — a Minnesota Democrat and one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress — as a political target, as Mr. Trump’s re-election campaign begins in earnest.
At issue were remarks that Ms. Omar made last month at an event hosted by the Council on American-Islamic Relations. There, she gave a speech in which she addressed lingering fear directed at Muslims, and the rights Muslims have to speak out about being viewed with suspicion.
Conservative news outlets and some Republican officials have focused on the words “some people did something,” arguing that Ms. Omar was playing down the attacks that killed more than 3,000 people and led to two yearslong wars. The video the president tweeted also focused on those four words from Ms. Omar’s speech.
A spokesman for Ms. Omar has said the speech was addressing civil rights.
Ms. Omar has already been the focus of threats, including one by a supporter of Mr. Trump who was recently arrested.
Ms. Omar’s closest ally in the House, Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, used Twitter to defend her colleague and urged others to do the same.
She included in her post the famous words of a Lutheran minister, Martin Niemöller, who had been a Nazi sympathizer, about turning his head on the Nazis’ actions during World War II.
Senator Bernie Sanders, independent of Vermont, who is running for president as a Democrat, quickly joined Ms. Ocasio-Cortez.
In a series of tweets, Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., a Democratic presidential candidate and a veteran who served in Afghanistan, also criticized Mr. Trump.
Another 2020 presidential candidate, Senator Elizabeth Warren, Democrat of Massachusetts, also chimed in.
It was unclear late Friday who made the video that the president tweeted. In recent weeks, his Twitter feed has promoted at least two controversial videos that came from elsewhere on the web.