The secrets came directly from the phones of President Lenín Moreno of Ecuador: intimate pictures of him and his family on vacation, text messages from his wife, even a photograph of the president himself in a posh bedroom, eating a lobster in bed.
The material, published last month on an anonymous website, was particularly embarrassing because Mr. Moreno was in a bruising national fight over his austerity measures. But rather than mount a defense, the president played the victim: He blamed WikiLeaks, whose founder, Julian Assange, had spent the last seven years holed up in the country’s London embassy.
WikiLeaks’ actions were “despicable,” said the country’s vice president on television, vowing to take action. The group denied leaking the information, but on Thursday Ecuador made good on its threat — opening the door to British police officers who carted away Mr. Assange.
With that, Mr. Assange’s long refuge inside the Ecuadorean Embassy finally came to an end, the capstone of an international cat-and-mouse game involving stolen document dumps, promises of more to come, failed efforts to contain him and accusations of blackmail.
Even as Ecuador harbored Mr. Assange from international prosecution, he and WikiLeaks wielded the threat of releasing damaging information against the Ecuadorean government.
In October 2016, as WikiLeaks was releasing thousands of emails hacked from the Democratic National Committee and the personal account of John D. Podesta, the chairman of the Clinton campaign, Ecuador restricted Mr. Assange’s access to the internet, citing his interference in a foreign election.
The United States may have played a central role in the effort to corral Mr. Assange. On Oct. 14, with the emails upending the campaign and the election just weeks away, a confidante of the Clintons and a top aide to Secretary of State John Kerry showed up at a dinner party hosted by the Ecuadorean ambassador before a ball, lingering with him as other guests left, several attendees said.
Over the years, the WikiLeaks founder has been embraced by everyone from Lady Gaga to Sean Hannity. But he’s also made enemies along the way. Our video shows how his anti-secrecy agenda has attracted, and repelled, people across the political spectrum.
Julian Assange, the controversial WikiLeaks founder. “There has been a lot of misquoting of me and WikiLeaks publications.” Called a villain by some. “That villain Julian Assange.” “He should be extradited to face justice here.” “I’m pleased to see him arrested.” And a hero by others. [Chanting] “Free the truth! Free Assange! “Don’t shoot the messenger!” Some on the left have embraced Assange for years, seeing him as a free-speech martyr. “As WikiLeaks stands under threats, so does the freedom of expression and the health of all our societies.” And Republicans, they have long considered Assange a Putin stooge who spilled America’s biggest secrets. As for President Trump, he now claims to know nothing. “I know nothing about WikiLeaks. It’s not my thing.” But he used to gush over Assange’s organization “WikiLeaks, I love WikiLeaks!” Here’s how such a divisive figure has become a vessel for people across the political spectrum. “I’ve always wanted to say, ‘We are all individuals!’” “We are all individuals!” One of Assange’s fiercest supporters is former “Baywatch” star and animal rights activist Pamela Anderson. She visited Assange at the Ecuadorean embassy in London, where he lived for seven years. “He’s so funny and he’s very kind and he’s very smart. He’s brilliant, and we talk about everything. I’m there for four hours at a time. And I see him all the time.” Anderson is a rumored lover of Assange’s and even wrote him poetry. Another fan? Fashion designer Vivienne Westwood, who has brought her support for Assange to the runway. “We sell these T-shirts, and I was able to give him £3,000 recently for some of the T-shirts we sold to help toward WikiLeaks.” And then there is Lady Gaga. “It’s pretty heavy It’s pretty heavy stuff.” She stopped by the embassy in 2012 and interviewed Assange. “You may be an enemy of the state, but you are not an enemy of humanity.” But this icon of left-leaning celebrities has also been embraced by white supremacist David Duke, who thanked him for a dump of Clinton campaign emails that may have helped Donald Trump. He tweeted: “God bless WikiLeaks. Julian Assange is a hero.” And the same leak made Assange a pariah to certain Democrats. “He has to answer for what he has done.” In a sign of how far Assange’s image has swung, there’s Fox commentator Sean Hannity. Hannity used to be a hater. “Assange is apparently not done waging his war against the U.S.” And now? “You look at WikiLeaks’s record, they’ve never printed a single thing proven untrue in like 12 years. Not one!” Friend at times, foe at others. Assange has inspired head-spinning adoration from both the left and the right. Yet his anti-establishment agenda has made Assange elusive, allowing him to be everything to everyone.
Mr. Assange’s internet was curtailed by the Ecuadorean Embassy the very next day.
But WikiLeaks quickly retaliated, issuing a cryptic message that a leak against Ecuador was on its way. The tactic seemed to work. Two months later, Mr. Assange said in an interview that his internet had been restored.
Mr. Assange has been hailed by many around the world as a champion of transparency and a casualty of his own success at revealing secrets.
But Ecuadorean officials contend that the expulsion comes from an extensive list of transgressions by Mr. Assange that soured their long — and often strained — relationship.
In explaining his decision, Mr. Moreno accused Mr. Assange of installing electronic distortion equipment in the embassy, blocking security cameras, confronting and mistreating guards and gaining access to security files without permission.
On Thursday, the government said it had also arrested a computer programmer in Ecuador in connection with the Assange case, contending that WikiLeaks had interfered in Ecuador’s domestic political affairs.
WikiLeaks insisted it was not involved in the hack of Mr. Moreno’s phones, and that the Ecuadorean government was using the episode as a false pretext to toss out Mr. Assange.
It was no secret that the United States wanted him removed. It was also clear that Mr. Moreno is eager for international loans and better relations with the United States after the tensions that festered under his leftist predecessor, who granted Mr. Assange shelter in the embassy.
“I inherited this situation,” Mr. Moreno said in a video address this week.
Fernando Cutz, a former senior adviser to H.R. McMaster, the former national security adviser, and a Latin America policy specialist at the White House, acknowledged that American officials regularly spoke with their Ecuadorean counterparts about handing over Mr. Assange.
But Mr. Cutz argued that Ecuadorean officials did not simply cave to American demands. They wanted Mr. Assange gone as well, he said.
Ecuador’s president at the time, Rafael Correa, had been criticized in his own country for a crackdown against the press. But in Mr. Assange, the Ecuadorean president found a symbol of his challenge to the United States, which he called an imperialist power. Mr. Assange was free to stay in the embassy as long as he pleased, Mr. Correa said.
But by 2016, a change in power was afoot in both the United States and in Ecuador. Hillary Clinton, who had run the State Department during the enormous leak of information by WikiLeaks in 2010, was running for president. Mr. Assange also had reason to worry about the coming election in Ecuador, where his stay in the embassy was becoming a campaign issue as well.
On Oct. 7, 2016, a tape was leaked showing Mrs. Clinton’s opponent, Donald J. Trump, boasting of sexually harassing women while filming a segment for the show “Access Hollywood,” sending Mr. Trump’s campaign into a major crisis.
Less than an hour later, WikiLeaks began publishing the first of thousands of hacked emails from Mr. Podesta’s account, creating a different controversy in the Clinton camp.
WikiLeaks continued to release the emails throughout October on a daily basis. American intelligence agents later concluded that the documents had been hacked by Russian operatives and laundered through WikiLeaks.
When Ecuador restricted Mr. Assange’s internet access in response, Mr. Correa’s administration said that it had acted on its own accord, not because of pressure from the United States. A spokesman for Mr. Kerry also denied that the Obama administration played any role.
But during the encounter on Oct. 14 — the night before Mr. Assange’s internet access was restricted — Patsy Thomasson, a veteran of the Clinton White House, and a senior aide to Mr. Kerry attended a dinner at the Ecuadorean Embassy hosted by Francisco Borja, the ambassador of Ecuador.
Attendees interviewed said it struck them as odd that such high-powered players would decide to attend a party hosted by a small country’s ambassador. They noted that neither Ms. Thomasson nor the Kerry aide was dressed in black tie for the ball, and that both stayed behind with the ambassador after other guests left for the event.
WikiLeaks struck back soon after. On Oct. 16, the day after Mr. Assange’s internet was restricted, WikiLeaks tweeted a code, known in its parlance as an “insurance file,” and signaled that an upcoming leak involving Ecuador was imminent.
According to former WikiLeaks insiders, Mr. Assange had damaging information about Ecuador and wasn’t bluffing.
Mr. Assange certainly seemed to have acquired compromising material. In 2015, Cynthia Viteri, a prominent Ecuadorean politician, and Fernando Villavicencio, an Ecuadorean political journalist, had gotten secret documents showing that Ecuador was running a surveillance program, using an Italian company to spy on journalists and political enemies, in addition to spying on Mr. Assange at the embassy.
Mr. Villavicencio said he sent the material to a WikiLeaks email address, hoping the organization would publish the information. He eventually published the documents himself. WikiLeaks never did, though it is clear from leaked 2015 chat group logs that Mr. Assange and his inner circle were aware of them.
Mr. Villavicencio said he believed the documents he sent to WikiLeaks may have been among those that Mr. Assange had threatened to publish.
Nothing ever came of the Ecuador-related “insurance file” WikiLeaks tweeted about in October 2016.
The controversy was just the beginning of Mr. Assange’s difficulties. Mr. Moreno took over as president in May 2017 and soon broke with the policies of his predecessor.
Advisers to Mr. Moreno met with Paul Manafort, who had served as President Trump’s campaign chairman, and raised the possibility of releasing Mr. Assange in exchange for concessions like debt relief. Mr. Moreno said repeatedly that Mr. Assange’s time in the embassy should not be forever.
Then, Mr. Moreno’s government was hit by a familiar disruption: more leaks.
In March, an anonymous website, INApapers.org, published around 200 private emails related to Mr. Moreno, text messages written by his wife and photos of the president and his family taking luxurious vacations in Europe.
Mr. Moreno’s government was quick to blame the release on WikiLeaks, which it says Mr. Assange still controls.
