An article on Sunday about a web-based learning platform rolled out by public schools in Kansas mistakenly linked a recurrence of Megan Jackson’s epileptic seizures to her middle school’s use of the Summit Learning platform. While her school uses some of the same web-based tools that are used by Summit, the school is not on the Summit platform. The error was repeated in a picture caption.
Because of an editing error, an article last Saturday referred incorrectly to Jesus’s background. While he lived in an area that later came to be known as Palestine, Jesus was a Jew who was born in Bethlehem.
An article on Friday about a cyclone in Mozambique misidentified the city from where Déborah Nguyen spoke. It was Johannesburg, not Beira.
An article on Friday about Joe Biden’s chances of winning the Democratic Party’s nomination for president misstated the number of Democratic candidates in the race. With his entry in the race, there are 20 candidates, not 19.
An article on Friday about Anna Sorokin’s conviction on grand larceny charges misidentified a hotel that lost $11,000 to Ms. Sorokin. It was the Beekman Hotel, not the Beacon Hotel.
An article on Page 20 about new operas in Berlin misspells a composer’s given name. It is Detlev Glanert, not Detlef.
An article on Tuesday about a possible ban on the international trade of Asian small-clawed otters included a quotation from a biologist that described incorrectly an increase in the popularity of pet otters. The increase has been exponential, not logarithmic.
An Op-Ed article on Monday about digital privacy misstated who uncovered the selling of location information by AccuWeather. It was the security analyst Will Strafach, not The New York Times.
An obituary on April 20 about James W. McCord Jr., who led the burglars in the Watergate break-in, referred incorrectly to the disposition of the cases against Mr. McCord and E. Howard Hunt. Mr. McCord, not Mr. Hunt, was convicted in a federal trial; Mr. Hunt, not Mr. McCord, pleaded guilty.
An obituary on Thursday about Verena Wagner Lafferentz, the last surviving grandchild of Richard Wagner, misstated the difference in age between her and Adolf Hitler, with whom she was romantically linked. He was three decades older than her, not two.
A picture caption with an obituary on Friday about the organist Marilyn Mason, using information from the University of Michigan, misstated when the photograph of Dr. Mason there was taken. It was in the 1960s, not the 1950s.
An obituary on Thursday about Grand Duke Jean of Luxembourg misstated the nature of his participation in the Allied invasion of France in 1944. He arrived in Normandy in the days after D-Day, when troops first landed on the beaches there — not on D-Day itself. In addition, the headline with the obituary misstated his age. As the obituary correctly noted, he was 98, not 88.
