Luke Walton, the N.B.A. coach who recently left the Los Angeles Lakers and was hired by the Sacramento Kings, has been sued by a former sports broadcaster who said he sexually assaulted her in a hotel room in 2014.
The lawsuit, filed in Los Angeles County Superior Court on Monday, was brought by Kelli Tennant, a former college volleyball player who worked as a host on Spectrum SportsNet. She detailed her allegation, which was first reported by TMZ, at a news conference on Tuesday.
Ms. Tennant said the assault took place at the Casa del Mar hotel in Santa Monica, while Mr. Walton was working as an assistant coach for the Golden State Warriors.
Mr. Walton had been a mentor and friend whom she had gotten to know through his own work doing sports analysis and through his wife, a former competitive volleyball player, according to the lawsuit. Ms. Tennant visited him while he was in town for a road game to drop off a copy of a book she had published, for which Mr. Walton had written the foreword, according to the lawsuit.
He took her up to his hotel room, where she said he suddenly pinned her on the bed, forcibly kissed her and groped her. She told him to stop, but he laughed at her pleas before eventually releasing her, according to the lawsuit.
She did not report the encounter at the time, she said, because she was 25 years old, early in her career and fearful of the ramifications. “I am no longer comfortable staying silent,” she said at the news conference.
The allegation against Mr. Walton emerged less than 10 days after he was named head coach of the Kings. Mr. Walton, 39, had spent three seasons as head coach of the Lakers before stepping down this month amid a vast upheaval after a disappointing season for the team. He was previously an assistant with the Warriors from 2014 to 2016.
All three teams and the league acknowledged the reports about the allegation in statements, but offered few details.
The Kings said they were gathering information and had no further comment on Tuesday.
The Warriors also said they had been unaware.
On Tuesday, the Santa Monica Police Department said that the department had not received any reports related to the allegation against Mr. Walton.
Ms. Tennant’s lawyer, Garo Mardirossian, said that his client had not planned on seeking criminal action.
Ms. Tennant said she spent years trying to put the encounter behind her before deciding to come forward.
Ms. Tennant worked as a sports television host, including covering the Lakers and the Los Angeles Dodgers, before beginning a career focused on health, wellness and women’s empowerment. She hosts a podcast and has a robust Instagram following.
Mr. Walton, the son of the Hall of Fame center Bill Walton, is a former player who spent most of his 10-year N.B.A. playing career with the Lakers, winning two championships as a reserve forward.
He became the head coach of the Lakers in 2016. In his third season, questions about his job security persisted, as the team struggled even after signing LeBron James last summer. Mr. Walton left this month in what the Lakers said was a mutual separation and was quickly hired by the Kings.
The details of the contract were not made public.