VIEQUES, P.R. — A newborn’s cries rarely echo anymore though the hallways of what passes as a hospital on the ravaged island of Vieques, off the coast of Puerto Rico.
“We miss it,” said Dennisse Bermúdez Colón, a nurse.
Nearly 18 months after the storm, the temporary arrangement feels increasingly permanent. The original hospital remains a shuttered wreck of rust and mold, home to the occasional rooster and a band of wild horses whose droppings litter the empty parking lot and ambulance bay.
“If they keep doing nothing, the hospital will get more deteriorated,” Isabel Encarnación Nazario, 65, lamented on a recent morning as she picked up a lab-work kit for her ailing 90-year-old mother from the makeshift clinic.
The dispute has interfered with aid reaching other parts of the country, including Midwestern states seeking flood relief and coastal states looking to increase hurricane protection. President Trump again accused Puerto Rican politicians of corruption and incompetence last week, signaling his unwillingness to approve more funds for the bankrupt commonwealth.
“So many wonderful people, but with such bad Island leadership and with so much money wasted,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter.
Republican and Democratic lawmakers have endorsed providing Puerto Rico with $600 million to address a more basic need than reconstruction: hunger. After the nearly Category 5 hurricane, Congress authorized $1.27 billion for Puerto Rico’s food stamp program, which for a year increased recipients’ monthly benefits to match those on the mainland. The bump expired last month.
“I haven’t eaten in two days,” María Concepción, 52, said last week in the parking lot of a local food stamp office in the municipality of Bayamón, outside San Juan, the capital. A few minutes later, she burst into tears.
Ms. Concepción, who said she is epileptic and suffering from cancer, had walked about two hours from her home only to learn that her appointment had been canceled. She hoped to request more money, after her benefit was cut more than half, to $108 a month.
About 85 percent of food on the island is imported, elevating prices for consumers. Some 1.3 million of 3.2 million Puerto Ricans — about 43 percent of the population — qualify for food stamps. The island has been in an economic recession for 12 years.
“It’s not much, but it’s something,” William Miranda, 59, a janitor who lost his job after the hurricane, said at the food stamp office. “We buy as much as possible on special at the supermarket,” added his wife, Carmen Lugo, 62.
House Democrats have pushed for funding beyond the food stamp program, including $849 million for the Environmental Protection Agency to fix damaged water systems, about $150 million in housing grants for Puerto Ricans to repair their homes, and a provision requiring the Federal Emergency Management Agency to pay the full cost of permanent work on public buildings and other infrastructure, as it did after Hurricanes Katrina and Sandy.
Without the FEMA provision, Puerto Rico could have to pick up 10 percent of the rebuilding costs — billions of dollars the commonwealth government, whose finances have been controlled by a federal oversight board since 2016, said it does not have.
That is why Gov. Ricardo A. Rosselló, other Puerto Rican officials and their allies on Capitol Hill have cast the disaster relief package as critical for the island’s long-term rebuilding. The legislation would not provide direct funding for projects like the Vieques hospital, but it would help ensure that the Puerto Rican government’s budget troubles don’t hold the project up.
In the San Juan neighborhood of Ocean Park, where some streets were flooded with smelly water for two weeks after Hurricane Maria, Jesús Herbón, the owner of a local bakery, jokes that he has become an expert on water pumps from all the time he has devoted to learning about how they failed during the storm.
Temporary pumps are now backing up the old ones while the Puerto Rico Department of Natural and Environmental Resources awaits FEMA funds for permanent upgrades, a department spokeswoman said.
So far, FEMA and other agencies have disbursed $11.2 billion in aid to Puerto Rico, according to the federal Office of Management and Budget. Some $41 billion has been allocated but not yet distributed; the budget office estimates the island could receive $91 billion over the next 20 years.
The Trump administration has questioned Puerto Rico’s ability to spend the money wisely ever since the commonwealth awarded a $300 million contract to Whitefish Energy, a Montana company with only two employees. Puerto Rico later created a recovery agency and agreed to additional oversight, though some residents remain skeptical that the money will be well-spent.
“Donald Trump is partly right — scoundrel that he is — because in Puerto Rico we live off the government,” said Ms. Encarnación, the Vieques resident.
Most of the aid Puerto Rico has received has gone toward emergency work, including debris removal and power restoration, a huge undertaking that took nearly a year. The New York Times found last year that much of FEMA’s money for emergency home repairs went to contractors charging steep markups.
A University of Michigan analysis published in the journal BMJ Global Health in January found it took twice as long — four months — for Hurricane Maria survivors in Puerto Rico to receive a comparable amount of individual aid (about $1 billion) as Hurricane Harvey survivors in Texas and Hurricane Irma survivors in Florida, though Maria was stronger and more devastating. Maria killed an estimated 2,975 people in Puerto Rico.
In Vieques, with the hospital out of commission, dialysis patients had to travel to the big island three times a week to get treatment for more than a year after the storm. Several patients died. Finally, in November, a mobile dialysis unit in a shiny trailer arrived at the temporary clinic, allowing local treatments to resume.
“It wasn’t easy,” said Edwin Alvarado Cordero, a 58-year-old diabetic. Standing across the street from the pharmacy in Isabel Segunda, the bigger of the island’s two towns, Mr. Alvarado recounted his thrice-weekly trips from Vieques to Humacao, which began at 4 a.m. and ended at 5:30 p.m.
Last year, on the ferry to the big island, Mr. Alvarado suffered a heart attack. He had open-heart surgery and survived. Though he can now receive dialysis in Vieques, he still travels to San Juan periodically to see his cardiologist. Specialists visit Vieques infrequently.
