WASHINGTON — Donald J. Trump ordered the man who would later serve briefly as his national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn, to find thousands of missing emails from Hillary Clinton’s computer server at the height of the 2016 presidential campaign, the special counsel’s report revealed on Thursday.
The episode is among the closest that investigators came to uncovering an instance in which Mr. Trump himself appeared to use whatever means necessary to locate the messages, though it stops short of saying he encouraged a breach of his opponent’s computers, networks or email accounts. Mr. Trump had insisted at the time that he was only joking when he encouraged Russian hackers to find and disclose 30,000 deleted emails from Mrs. Clinton’s servers.
As it turned out, Russia’s military intelligence unit and supporters of Mr. Trump’s campaign had — apparently independently — sought the email trove, convinced that it contained embarrassing material that could prove decisive on Election Day.
Mrs. Clinton’s use of a private email server while she was secretary of state had been the focus of a lengthy investigation by the F.B.I., and Mr. Trump, calling his campaign opponent “Crooked Hillary,” was eager to turn attention to her actions.
Moscow’s most intense efforts came just five hours after Mr. Trump first signaled his desire by declaring in Florida in July 2016, “Russia, if you’re listening, I hope you’re able to find the 30,000 emails that are missing.” Skilled Russian attackers working for two different military units of Russia’s G.R.U. intelligence agency — one called Unit 26165, another Unit 74455 — went to work on exactly that task. Mr. Mueller’s investigators never cracked the mystery of how they knew, within hours, which servers and accounts to try to breach.
The picture of those and other hacking efforts that emerged from Mr. Mueller’s report is, not surprisingly, a complex mix of political desires in Moscow and New York, and a complex series of computer breaches that, at times, the Russians carried out with remarkable precision. Mr. Mueller concluded that “the Russian government interfered in the 2016 presidential election in sweeping and systematic fashion,” and for nearly 200 pages it lays out details of that effort.
The findings from the special counsel, Robert S. Mueller III, are now available to the public. The redacted report details his two-year investigation into Russian interference in the 2016 presidential election.
Because there will never be the equivalent of a 9/11 Commission report on perhaps the most famous and consequential state-sponsored attempt to hack an election, the report will stand as the final word on what happened, even if it does not address how to prevent future breaches.
Meanwhile, a candidate who understood very little about how computers and networks operate was clamoring for the leak of data from Mrs. Clinton’s private server, the special counsel’s investigation found.
Mr. Mueller found no evidence that Russians and the Trump campaign worked together, and that while the Russians easily infiltrated the Democratic National Committee and the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, they appeared to have a difficult time doing so with Mrs. Clinton’s own personal server.
The account of those efforts may be the closest the nation comes to understanding the details of the largest cyberoperation ever initiated against an American election.
When Mr. Flynn received the request from Mr. Trump, he contacted Barbara Ledeen, a former Senate staff member close to the retired general, and Peter Smith, an investment adviser. The investigators concluded that as early as December 2015, long before the Russian hacking of the Democratic National Committee became known, Ms. Ledeen had sent a 25-page proposal to Mr. Smith about how to obtain what she believed were “classified emails” that had already been “purloined by our enemies.” The exchange was included in emails the special counsel obtained during the investigation.
Ms. Ledeen urged a search of public sources, in hopes that some of the Clinton emails had been leaked by foreign intelligence services that she believed had perhaps already extracted them from Mrs. Clinton’s server in Chappaqua, N.Y. If that failed, she wanted to make contact with “various foreign services” to see if any of them had cracked the server.
After initially turning down the idea, Mr. Smith eventually had a change of heart, the report states, after Mr. Trump’s requests in July 2016. Ms. Ledeen later contended she had found a trove of the emails on what she termed the “dark web” — referring to parts of the web that are not searchable, and that are often used for criminal activity. But it turned out that the trove was “not authentic,” the report says, prompting a more fevered search. Mr. Smith wrote in one message that “all 33k deleted emails” would be released by Nov. 1 on WikiLeaks, a week before the election. They never appeared.
Mr. Trump said he believed that explanation, “because they are some of the best in the world.” Mr. Mueller’s report concluded that they were good but ultimately failed to cover their tracks.