Can “Saturday Night Live” still write an opening sketch that isn’t about the misadventures of the Trump administration? This week’s episode showed that yes, it can, though it still had to reach into its celebrity Rolodex to get it done.
In the opening sketch, Sudeikis met with two campaign aides, played by cast members Cecily Strong and Kenan Thompson, who explained that they had an urgent matter to discuss with him.
“Joe, it’s about all the touchy feely stuff,” Thompson said.
His aides introduced him to a sensitivity-training consultant (Kate McKinnon), whom Sudeikis greeted by putting his nose and forehead against hers. “I’m just connecting,” he said.
Sudeikis said that he, too, had recently taken a DNA test, just like “Lizzie Warren.” “It turns out that I’m one percent Eskimo so I’m allowed to do the kissing,” he said. He and McKinnon then talked through a couple of hypothetical scenarios when meeting people on the campaign trail.
The second voter, played by Leslie Jones, greeted him enthusiastically. “You’re Obama’s granddaddy!” she exclaimed.
For Harington’s monologue,“S.N.L.” went with one of its most familiar gimmicks: having the host field questions from ringers in the studio audience. After an eerily clean-shaven Harington vowed that he wouldn’t reveal how “Game of Thrones” concludes, he nevertheless faced several variations on that question — from his “Thrones” cast mates.
In a fake HBO commercial, “S.N.L.” imagined the cable network’s future after “Game of Thrones” is over: a lineup saturated with “Thrones”-related prequels, sequels and spinoffs.
Those shows included “Castle Black,” a moody, “Riverdale”-style drama about the forbidden romance between Jon Snow (Harington) and a female white walker (Heidi Gardner); an animated series in the style of MTV’s “Daria,” called — what else? — “Arya”; a sitcom called “The Queen of King’s Landing”; as well as “Cersei and the City”; “The Marvelous Mrs. Melisandre”; and a crime procedural, “Game of Thrones: Special Victims Unit,” starring Mariska Hargitay and Ice-T.
At the “Weekend Update” desk, the anchors Colin Jost and Michael Che continued to riff on Biden’s troubles and the legal battle over the final report of the special counsel Robert S. Mueller III.
Four women have come forward claiming that Joe Biden touched them in ways that made them feel uncomfortable. And yeah, I could see that. He looks like one of those uncles that calls spring ‘Sundress Time.’ It’s very disappointing, but older people, in general, have a problem with boundaries. There’s a lady in my building who’s like 75. And every time I see her, she grabs my arm and says something dirty. It’s very uncomfortable but I let her because she’s hot.
And then a pro-Trump group released a new ad saying that Biden’s behavior with women is unacceptable and should instantly disqualify him from running. The group’s name is Independent Republicans of New York, or IRONY.
The House Judiciary Committee voted to subpoena the full, unredacted Mueller report from the White House. Man, I really wish I knew about redacting when I was in school. I probably would have graduated. “I did my report, it’s just redacted right now.” If Donald Trump stole his presidency, why don’t we just steal it back? If I was running for president, I would be in Putin’s DMs right now, negotiating. Why is everybody trying to play fair with this guy? Even the F.B.I. Oh, you didn’t find anything? Then plant it, you’re the F.B.I. Just turn off your body cam and put some crack in his shoes, man.
Not to neglect the political turmoil on the other side of the Atlantic, “S.N.L.” cast McKinnon as Theresa May, the British prime minister, trying to keep her spirits up after Parliament rejected numerous plans to withdraw the nation from the European Union.
In a filmed segment set to the Sara Bareilles song “She Used to Be Mine,” McKinnon walked through the streets of Britain, drawing nasty looks from her fellow citizens and some obscene gestures from royal guards. As the sketch went to increasingly surreal extremes, we also saw McKinnon performing an interpretive dance while dressed in a Union Jack body suit, and taking an imaginary twirl with Winston Churchill (likely the only time we’ll ever see Kit Harington play this role).