Books|What Pulitzer Prize-Nominated Books Should You Read First?
What Pulitzer Prize-Nominated Books Should You Read First?
The winners of the Pulitzer Prizes, which honor excellence in journalism, arts and letters, were announced on Monday. Here are reviews of the 15 books that made it to the final round.
This is “among the first novels to chronicle the AIDS epidemic from its initial outbreak to the present — among the first, that is, to convey the terrors and tragedies of the epidemic’s early years as well as its course and its repercussions over the decades,” our reviewer wrote.
“Orange makes Oakland into a ‘there’ that becomes all the more concretely, emphatically and fully so in a novel that deals, in tones that are sweeping and subtle, large-gestured and nuanced, with what the notion of belonging means for Native Americans,” our reviewer wrote.
In this book about the doctor-botanist who in the 1800s assembled a 20-acre plant collection where Rockefeller Center is today, Johnson weaves in “threads of history — political, medical and scientific — and the tale of an up-and-coming New York City,” our reviewer wrote.
This book chronicles the history of torture in the United States from before colonization to the present. Brundage argues that “the process by which torture is rendered invisible by euphemism and erasure, bolstering a myth that this country is ‘civilized,’ is an enduring American tradition,” according to a reviewer for The Los Angeles Times.
In this “judicious and absorbing” biography of Edward Lansdale, an intelligence officer who held a different, arguably more humane view of how the Vietnam War could have been approached, “what emerges is a picture of a man who from an early point possessed an unusual ability to relate to other people, a stereotypically American can-do optimism, an impatience with bureaucracy and a fascination with psychological warfare,” our reviewer wrote.
“Charles, a trans woman, turns to a sort of Chaucerian-texting hybrid in an inspired effort to find language as unstable as her experience,” we wrote in our New & Noteworthy column.
In this collection, “we get the rhyming wit one expects from Stallings, although in the best poems here that wit is attractively darkened by experience,” said our poetry columnist, who named this one of the best poetry collections of 2018.
The winning book tells the story of the social, physical and financial toll of fracking on a Pennsylvania town. Parts of the book “read as intimately as a novel, though its insidious, slow-motion ordeal is all too real,” our reviewer wrote.
In this book, Yeung turns her attention to sexual harassment against women farmworkers, domestic workers and janitors — groups of women who are typically left out of conversations around sexual violence and the #MeToo movement. Yeung’s exposé is “a bleak but much-needed addition to the literature on sexual harassment in the U.S.,” according to a reviewer in The New York Review of Books.
