WASHINGTON — During his presidential campaign, Donald J. Trump often complained about how President Barack Obama drew red lines that he never enforced, and how a diminished America let Russia walk into Syria unchallenged, something he said would not happen if the Russian leader respected the United States president.
For the past week, the Trump administration has escalated its warnings about Russian intervention in the country, claiming that Moscow is helping to prop up President Nicolás Maduro of Venezuela and undermining the hopes of American officials that the Venezuelan military will oust him. The United States has been trying to rally the world behind Juan Guaidó, the opposition leader, as Venezuela’s legal interim president.
Such declarations seem to set up a test: Would Venezuela be the place where Mr. Trump, who has often seemed willing to tolerate Mr. Putin’s most audacious provocations, finally draws his own red line? And, if so, does he have a plan to enforce it?
It is notable that Mr. Bolton, not Mr. Trump himself, made the Friday announcement, with its echoes of the 1823 Monroe Doctrine, the first time the United States issued similar warnings telling foreign powers not to intervene in the Western Hemisphere. In offering the unvarnished declaration on Monday — and while Mr. Trump focuses on the southern border — Mr. Pompeo said he was merely repeating the president’s sentiments on Venezuela.
Yet Mr. Maduro is digging in — despite the economic sanctions against his government and the recognition of Mr. Guaidó as interim president by the United States and more than 50 other nations. And Mr. Putin may well see an opportunity to replay Syria in Venezuela, propping up another leader that many American officials said had to go — Mr. Maduro instead of President Bashar al-Assad of Syria, this time — and frustrating Washington’s regional goals.
The administration so far has been quite cautious when it comes to threatening military action in Venezuela. While there have been ritual reminders that “all options are on the table,” there is no indication that any military intervention — which has a long and unhappy history in Latin America — is being seriously contemplated.
He then talked about tightening sanctions on oil sales, dismissed Russian accusations that the United States was trying to mount a coup against Mr. Maduro and warned that it “would be a mistake for the Russians to think they have a free hand here — they don’t.” But he carefully avoided explaining why Mr. Putin might feel under constraint.
Mr. Putin has plenty of reasons for keeping Mr. Maduro in power. Russia is also focused on recovering billions of dollars in debt that Mr. Maduro owes it, some of which is being paid back in oil. Full repayment may never happen.
For Mr. Trump, this is the newest iteration of his many Russia problems — and the latest example of his reticence to talk publicly about Moscow’s malign influence around the world. His silence is jarring, since Mr. Bolton, Mr. Pompeo and Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, talk about it almost every week.
Perhaps that is a reaction to the enormous, bipartisan criticism he received after his seemingly deferential approach to Mr. Putin in Helsinki, Finland, last summer, when Mr. Trump once again appeared to be convinced by the Russian leader’s denials that he had interfered with the 2016 United States presidential election.
The president is not alone in his critique of how the Obama administration handled Syria. One of the most thoughtful analyses of what went wrong came from William J. Burns, Mr. Obama’s deputy secretary of state, in his new book on American diplomacy, “The Back Channel.” It is rife with warnings that could also apply to Venezuela.
