U.S.|It’s Earth Day. Here’s How to Make Less Trash.
It’s Earth Day. Here’s How to Make Less Trash.
Danner Doud-Martin is not a climate change expert or a scientist. But she’s the person I wanted to talk to for Earth Day.
This year it was certified as TRUE Platinum Zero Waste, meaning the building sends almost nothing to the landfill. Like, ever.
“We encourage a ‘pack in, pack out’ mentality, like going into a forest,” Ms. Doud-Martin told me.
Ms. Doud-Martin said that initially, it was tough to persuade harried students and overworked educators to get onboard.
For the most part, she said, they’ve come around.
Still, getting a whole building down to “zero waste” isn’t so simple.
There’s a cafe where students, teachers and staff pick up lunch, often to eat at their desks. That’s been tricky, too, she said.
Right now, customers are encouraged to bring their own containers. Snacks are sold in bulk rather than plastic-intensive packaging and there are no beverages in single-use bottles.
The final piece? Everyone has been asked to print a lot less — a tough task for a school that has previously run on hard copies of case studies.
Ultimately, it’s been satisfying, Ms. Doud-Martin said. She said she’s been fielding inquiries from others on the U.C. Berkeley campus, as well as representatives from schools around the state about the zero waste effort.
1. Bring your own reusable cutlery, cups, napkins and grocery bags wherever you can. “I use linens, I always have a fork on me — I can always bust out that fork for you,” she said. While she used to return plastic grocery bags to the store, now that’s not an option, because, “there’s nothing to do with them.” So she tries to carry reusable bags for produce.
2. Learn what grade of plastic your city or county recycles. Here’s a guide to what the numbers mean.
3. Biodegradable does not mean compostable.
4. You might be able to recycle or compost unexpected things: You can compost a pizza box, and you can recycle foil, if you scrape the goop off.
We’ve been talking a lot about the desert lately, but if that’s too much of a haul for a weekend trip from wherever you live, you might instead consider a getaway to Mendocino County.
The Times just published a new “36 Hours” guide to the area about 90 miles north of San Francisco. Enjoy walking through redwoods? Perfect. Relish sweeping views of the Pacific? Who doesn’t? Wine and goat cheese and fancy pickles sound good? What about farm-to-table dining — emphasis on the farm?
It’s all there, plus quaint places to stay. But Mendocino, the piece notes, has managed to maintain a rural feel, even as the Bay has transformed. So maybe keep the existing community in mind if you do visit.
