Despite a turbulent week in which he was accused by several women of inappropriate physical contact, former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. remains popular among Iowa Democrats and leads a new poll that also indicates Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind., is on the rise.
He did especially well among voters age 65 and older, drawing 44 percent of their support.
The poll numbers were less encouraging for Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont, the front-runner among the announced candidates. Sixteen percent of respondents said they would support or lean toward him as their first choice. Twenty-five percent of voters had called him their first choice in a poll last month conducted by the Des Moines Register and CNN.
The Monmouth poll also found that about half of the Iowa Democrats surveyed ranked health care as the top policy priority, followed by environmental concerns.
The poll of 351 Iowa Democrats had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus 5.2 percentage points. The poll was conducted April 4-9, several days after the first complaints from women about Mr. Biden.
The former vice president’s decades-long habit of hugging, touching and kissing people has become a subject of scrutiny in recent weeks after several women came forward saying his physicality made them uncomfortable. Still, support for Mr. Biden remained about the same as a month ago, when The Des Moines Register poll showed Mr. Biden as the top choice for 27 percent of respondents.
Over that period, support for Mr. Buttigieg appears to have risen. The Monmouth poll showed 9 percent of likely Iowa caucusgoers support him; in the Register poll last month, only one percent of voters labeled him as their first choice for president.
After Mr. Biden, Mr. Sanders and Mr. Buttigieg came Senator Kamala Harris of California and Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, who were each the top choice for 7 percent of respondents. Former Representative Beto O’Rourke drew the support of 6 percent.
Other candidates, such as Senators Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota and Cory Booker of New Jersey, polled lower.