Confident about which way to go, his first day at Western Electric and more reader tales of New York City in this week’s Metropolitan Diary.
I noticed a woman in front of my local supermarket asking a man for directions. I also noticed that he looked as baffled as she did.
As a proud New Yorker who loves giving directions, I decided to step in. I’ve lived in the city long enough to be confident that I am usually correct.
We were at 15th Street and Seventh Avenue, and the woman was asking how to get to an address on Seventh Avenue South. I told her she only needed to go south from where we were, that if she just kept walking Seventh Avenue would turn into Seventh Avenue South and she would find the address she was looking for.
She thanked me, smiled and turned to set off. I told her it was my pleasure to help and gave her my standard, consistent, confident piece of advice: Just do as I advise and do not to ask anyone else for directions.
After my husband died in hospice in 2013, I gathered his belongings. There weren’t many.
I planned to donate them, but as I looked at his shoes, an expression popped into my mind: “No one can fill his shoes.” I had no idea what I was going to do with them.
A man on the custodial staff saw me and pointed at the shoes.
“Are they Top-Siders?” he asked enthusiastically.
“Yes,” I said, a sound of surprise in my own voice.
“Yes,” I said emphatically.
It was 1982 and I was living in the Upper East Side. I left my apartment for work early on a Tuesday. When I got to the subway station, I saw that there were tons of commuters fighting to get down the stairs to the platform. It was obvious that the trains were not running properly.
Even though I was on a limited budget, I decided to take a taxi to my office at Park Avenue and 39th Street. I was supposed to make a presentation at an early meeting, so I knew it was the right decision.
It took some time, but I finally flagged down a cab. As we approached my destination, I began to searching my pocketbook for my wallet so I could pay the driver. When I found my wallet and opened it, I saw that I had only three singles. It wasn’t enough.
I asked the driver to stop near a bank so I could get the cash I needed to pay him.
My wife and I moved to Manhattan from Ithaca, N.Y., in 1964. On our first night in our new apartment at 86th Street and First Avenue, a neighbor invited us for drinks.
Our host was a native New Yorker and he told us all about how cosmopolitan New Yorkers were and how well they knew the city.
The next morning, I was on the subway platform at 86th Street and Lexington Avenue waiting for an express train to take me to Fulton Street and Broadway and my job at the once-great, now long-gone Western Electric Company.
It was my first trip on the subway and I was a bit nervous. I approached a man on the platform and asked if the express train went to Fulton and Broadway.
