Kirsten Gillibrand, Pete Buttigieg and the fresh-face fallacy.
As the Democratic field for 2020 gets more crowded, several fresh young faces have begun to emerge. There’s Beto O’Rourke, 46, a Texas congressman who lost his Senate race against Ted Cruz last year. There’s Mayor Pete (last name Buttigieg), just 37 and a gay veteran, who runs the city of South Bend, Ind. (pop. 102,245). There’s the longer shot Andrew Yang, 44, corporate lawyer turned do-gooder entrepreneur, who is campaigning on the promise of a universal basic income. And now, there is Tim Ryan, 45, a congressman from Ohio best known for challenging Nancy Pelosi for the speakership.
The Democrats vying for 2020 run a remarkable age gamut. Mr. Buttigieg is the youngest and Bernie Sanders, at 77, is the oldest. The prominent female candidates cluster more in the middle: Kirsten Gillibrand is the youngest at 52, and Elizabeth Warren is the oldest at 69, with Kamala Harris (54) and Amy Klobuchar (58) in the middle. But whether a youngish candidate is bright, brilliant and promising or inexperienced, off-putting and ruthlessly ambitious depends on whether the young thing in question is male or female.
“Promise” itself is gendered. Research consistently shows that in American workplaces, women tend to be promoted once their managers see them perform well; men are promoted if managers believe in their potential to do well. We’re running the same experiment in politics: Voters, donors and journalists are all excited by the great leadership potential of young men who leapfrog up the political ladder. They expect women to prove themselves before they move forward.
And so women don’t move forward as quickly. Women are more likely than men to enter politics later in life, having spent years shoring up the experience, accomplishments and recognition necessary to be considered credible contenders for higher office. Women start low and climb up, which means they may not climb as high. Women also tend to run for more collaborative legislative positions (school board, state legislature, Congress) rather than executive ones (mayor, governor, president). Men do the opposite, seeking executive roles, starting early and skipping ahead.
Essentially all of the women running for president built their political lives in legislative bodies, and all but one also worked in law. Even the prominent young Democratic women making headlines outside of the presidential campaigns — Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Ilhan Omar, Ayanna Pressley — are doing so in this more traditionally female way of a step-by-step rise through legislative bodies. The female presidential contenders have not generally been elected to major executive roles. Nearly two-thirds of the men have.
In a political environment where “fresh faces” are rewarded, this gives men an advantage. (It also seems to be largely benefiting white men this time around — just ask Julián Castro, 44, whose longer, ladder-climbing résumé has resulted in anemic press coverage). We want something new, but for women, unfamiliarity and youth end up being tied to incompetence.
Take Mr. Buttigieg, an indisputably intelligent and thoughtful man, whose youth has been wrought to his advantage.  Reporters deem him “authoritative and logical and very young,” noting that he’s “at the forefront of a new crop of political leaders.” He started his political career with a bid for Indiana state treasurer (he lost), then for mayor of South Bend (he won, then won re-election) and then for Democratic National Committee chairman (he dropped out). Now he’s seeking what would be his second executive role: president of the United States.
Contrast that with Kirsten Gillibrand, who may now be solidly in middle age, but was a bright young thing once, too. Like Mr. Buttigieg, she went from college to graduate school (Oxford for him, U.C.L.A. Law for her) and then into the kind of corporate job increasingly considered a political liability on the left (management consulting for him, a law firm for her). From there, Ms. Gillibrand did the more typically female thing, climbing the ladder rung by rung: She worked on Hillary Clinton’s Senate campaign, then ran for Congress in a traditionally red district in New York before being appointed to complete Mrs. Clinton’s Senate term; she won re-election herself, twice. Only now, after more than a decade in legislative roles, is she running for president.
It’s not just women’s and men’s paths that look different; it’s also how reporters tell their stories. Ms. Gillibrand’s red-district folksiness got her branded by some as “a country bumpkin who is in over her head.” Mr. Buttigieg’s is cast as a bonus — he doesn’t wear a jacket (“I just feel more comfortable with my sleeves rolled up,” he said) and can win in a red state.
Few seem worried that Mr. Buttigieg is in a hurry. Instead, people wonder whether America is ready for a millennial president, a question not asked in relation to the admittedly unlikely Tulsi Gabbard, also 37.
Consider too that the years in which one is considered a fresh face or a rising star coincide with the years in which most Americans have children. Mr. O’Rourke, the father of three young children, has spoken (in a tone-deaf way, for which he later apologized) about his wife doing the work at home so that he could be away running for office multiple times. Mr. O’Rourke, who is 46, is cast as young even by his detractors (“a young man who’s got very little going for himself,” President Trump grumbled). Does the youthful label come from having young kids? His are 8, 10 and 12. But Ms. Gillibrand also became a parent in her mid-30s, and her sons are 10 and 15.
Trevor Noah was certainly right when he said that at 52, Ms. Gillibrand is not exactly a “young mom.” But since when is a 46-year-old a “young man”? Both of them would be younger than the average American president, who is a touch over 55 — a statistic that includes a great many men born at a time when many people weren’t expected to live much past 40.
While Ms. Gillibrand was called “Senator Working Mom,” Mr. O’Rourke’s status as a parent has been just one part of his story, not the core of it. After losing his Senate race, he took an extended solo road trip to clear his head and blog (or write “in a literary online diary”). A jaunt that would be portrayed as child abandonment had a woman done it “could help him politically, advancing his offbeat brand,” reporters mused. Few fretted about who was watching his children.
Women typically find their family responsibilities to be less flexible. Elizabeth Warren was a young mother and a young law professor at the same time; according to a law school friend, she was also doing all of her family’s shopping, cooking and child care, and nearly dropped out of the work force as a result. One doesn’t imagine a Kerouac-style road trip was on the table for Ms. Warren as a young mom — and certainly not dreams of the presidency. That all came much later, as it does for most women. And later, of course, means older.
Unfortunately for women, age poses an unsolvable problem: They are seen as too young and inexperienced right up until they are branded too old and tedious. Ms. Warren, for example, finds herself put in the same “old” category as Mr. Sanders and Joe Biden, even though both men are nearly a decade older than she is.
Men who are more or less the same age as Ms. Warren — Sherrod Brown (66), John Hickenlooper (67), Jay Inslee (68) — are not lumped in with the white-hairs. If women in their 40s are “in a hurry,” and women in their 50s are old news, and women in their 60s are just old, when, exactly, is a woman supposed to go to the White House?
Jill Filipovic is the author of “The H Spot: The Feminist Pursuit of Happiness” and a contributing opinion writer.