CHICAGO — Journalists have no idea how the 2020 election will play out. And that’s a good thing.
Some of the country’s top political journalists came together last week for a gathering convened by the strategist David Axelrod to talk about how to cover the presidential race in a way that won’t leave anybody dumbfounded on election night. The ideas that cropped up again and again on the panels were so basic to the practice of reporting that they are all too often ignored.
Travel the country. Talk to people. Assume nothing.
Such fundamentals may not seem fashionable in a media industrial complex that rewards logorrheic punditry and feigned certitude. But the inability of the media class to imagine the success of Donald J. Trump — and its underappreciation of the grievances that drove his supporters — has left reporters, pundits and producers wondering how they can be more prepared this time around.
The pressure is on for journalists to be smarter in 2020. Even as online and TV business models encourage scooplets and mini-scandals. Even as the sitting president works to erode trust in the press.
The two-day event, with about 250 people in attendance, was co-sponsored by Mr. Axelrod’s political institute at the University of Chicago and Harvard’s Nieman Foundation for Journalism. Google hosted the talks at its expensively amenitied office building in Chicago’s hip West Loop neighborhood. Yes, lattes were served.
In fact, the event featured Democratic and Republican speakers, with much of the discussion focused on practical, nonpartisan reporting advice.
Here is what’s on the minds of leading journalists as the 2020 race begins.
Peter Hamby, the host of Snapchat’s “Good Luck America,” said he had an eye-opening moment while watching the second debate between Mr. Trump and Hillary Clinton in 2016.
Most political journalists spend a lot of time on Twitter tracking the real-time thoughts of pundits, activists, campaign operatives and reporters like themselves.
Most speakers here said that was not a great idea.
“The Daily” sat down with Dean Baquet, the executive editor of The New York Times, to discuss how criticism of The Times’s coverage of the last presidential election will inform our approach this time.
In the time since the 2016 presidential campaign, the media’s coverage of that race has come to be criticized for operating under three key assumptions. That Hillary Clinton’s Democratic nomination was inevitable.
She has no competition.
That Donald Trump’s Republican nomination was unlikely.
I know you don’t believe that.
And that once Clinton and Trump had become their party’s nominees, she would win.
— 100 percent chance. Do you still think she has a 100 percent chance of winning the election?
Today: With voting for 2020 set to begin in Iowa on Monday, a conversation with the executive editor of the New York Times, Dean Baquet, about the lessons of 2016. It’s Friday, January 31.
— first time here.
Thank you. So Dean, I actually want to start in a kind of unexpected place, with a hiring announcement that The Times made a few years back. So I’m going to ask you to read this email.
— which is, do me a favor and read the date on that announcement.
So what does that date mean to you?
You knew what I was up to?
Yeah, yeah, of course. And look, it’s a legitimate question. It really is a legitimate question.
Because it’s highly unusual for a news organization to — I don’t even think she had announced at that point.
It would be two years.
Yes, right. So she hadn’t announced. I think most people thought she would be a candidate, but she had not announced. And I get the criticism. So let me talk about it a little bit.
The criticism is, by focusing on her so early, we were anointing her the Democratic nominee. That we were saying to the world, that The New York Times looked at the field of possible candidates and thought, Hillary Clinton was the one that we should start covering two years before she announces, long before anybody else announces.
And secondly, we were inevitably setting ourselves up to write harder stories about her, even before she declared. But mainly, I think the criticism is, we were saying to the world, The New York Times thinks Hillary Clinton is going to be the Democratic nominee.
And probably the president.
— perhaps an air of inevitability.
That’s right. You know, I’ve thought a lot about that decision. I mean, I was the managing editor at the time, but that means I helped run the newsroom. I actually don’t think assigning somebody to her that early was a mistake. The Clinton power structure, it represented a certain arm of the Democratic Party in repose. And also, it was inevitable that Hillary Clinton would be a large player on the American stage for years to come.
But I’m also conceding, by the way, that if I sat down here with a pen and looked at stories at the time, I would edit more carefully to make sure that we did not give a sense of inevitability. But I don’t think I was a mistake.
This is likely to be a front-runner, this is likely to be a nominee, this is likely to be first woman president.
Right, we’re going to talk about cause and effect.
I mean, chicken and egg, influence and outcome.
And you mentioned, Dean, that if you had the opportunity, you might go back and re-edit a bit.
And we’re going to give you a little bit of an opportunity to do that here.
I always love doing that.
So two years later, in April of 2015, Amy Chozick writes the story, saying that Clinton is indeed running for president. And she writes in the opening line, and I’m going to read this: “Ending two years of speculation and coy denials, Hillary Clinton announced on Sunday that she would seek the presidency for a second time, immediately establishing herself as the likely 2016 Democratic nominee.” Now, we’re actually saying the thing in the story.
— that she is the likely nominee. In retrospect, should we have written that a little bit differently?
Yes, of course. It jumped right to horse race. And by the way, I’m not blaming Amy for this.
Yeah, look, if I had to edit that story all over again, I would have toned down the inevitability of it, of course. Yes, I would have. I would not make it seem like Hillary Clinton has announced and she’s going to get it. It’s got a little bit of a tone of that. I would do it differently, sure.
So I want to compare the Clinton announcement to what happened when a challenger to Clinton entered the race that same month in 2015.
I’m going to ask you to read, Dean, this story, the highlighted portion that our colleague Alan Rappeport wrote.
I can guess this one. Go ahead.
This is the highlighted portion.
“Senator Bernie Sanders, the Vermont independent, announced Thursday that he was running for president as a Democrat, injecting a progressive voice into the contest and providing Hillary Rodham Clinton with her first official rival for the party’s nomination.” Keep going?
I think that’s a great lead.
Yeah, I think that’s a great lead. I think that captures what happened. It captures the role he played. He did inject a progressive voice. He did have a dramatic impact on the election. We quoted him. We talked about the role he would play in four paragraphs. I haven’t read the whole rest of the story again.
We talked about the issues that he cared about most. It feels to me a little less horse race.
Mm-hm. And when you say “horse race,” you mean emphasis on who’s up, who’s down?
Yes, yes, yes. The second paragraph doesn’t say, he’s up, he’s down. And I think this is — I think this is a — you know, if I’m re-editing, I think this story I would change less.
O.K., I agree with you to a point.
— but as existing in a way that would shape Hillary Clinton.
So there’s a criticism, I think, could naturally arise from that, and a frustration in the Sanders world that the media is characterizing him as this thing that’s going to needle her.
This distant possibility that, let’s be honest, doesn’t really stand that much of a chance.
And that does feel a little embedded in there.
Yeah, well, let me say two things. First, he was a long shot. And here, I can pull back for a second and just talk about journalism.
I mean, journalism is, by its very nature, flawed.
And when I say flawed, it’s also great. It’s also, for my money, the most beautifully designed way of communication imaginable, and there’s nothing like it in the world. But there are built-in flaws. The flaws are, you do have to tell people what to think. Most Americans had not heard of Bernie Sanders. Most Americans had heard of Hillary Clinton.
— this guy’s a long shot. I do think we have an obligation.
And I think we met it with this story, because we also told you what he stood for, right? That’s the main thing.  I do think we have an obligation to pull back in the moment and say, here’s our best sussing out of where we think this person stands.
And I think that was accurate for Bernie Sanders.
You’re saying understanding — contemporaneous understandings — are by definition ephemeral.
But word choice and language are enduring, right?
And so couldn’t we have used language, like “Clinton has significant financial and political advantages. They might be hard to overcome” rather than “a long shot“?
— because of the nature of the ups and downs, the horse race, is, I suspect I would go back at every campaign and re-edit a bunch of stories. But I think we got to tell the readers, in the moment, how should we think about this.
I think the reader picks up The New York Times and says, Bernie Sanders, I’ve never heard of him. How should I think about him? And I think this captured that.
I wonder what you think the impact of that was? This is kind of a chicken and egg situation, because I think part of what the Sanders campaign was so frustrated by and angry about is that they thought this coverage and the assumptions they reflected were not just annoying, they weren’t just frustrating.
They thought that it had real world consequences.
That in presenting his candidacy — intentionally or not — as less valid, the media perpetuated those assumptions and helped to make them a reality.
And if The New York Times thought that Sanders was a long shot, a voter might think that, too. If they thought Clinton was the likely nominee, a voter might think that, too.
Yeah, well part of my response to that would be, we thought Jeb Bush was inevitable too. And he lasted about 15 minutes.
You’re right about Jeb. I was assigned to cover him very early.
Yeah, and we thought — we just figured, O.K., this is going to be Bush versus Clinton. This is going to be the old establishment.
The power of a narrative.
— were inevitable.
And some of the seemingly inevitable candidates — I can go way back. I mean, I can remember when the governor of Texas seemed like such a powerful candidate. I can’t even remember his name. I can remember the year Rudy Giuliani seemed like a front-runner and was on the cover of Time Magazine. So we did learn something about inevitability, which is maybe that it’s not so inevitable.
It finally occurred to me, you’re talking about Rick Perry.
— ledger. Could you, Dean, read this, from our friend and colleague Alex Burns in June of 2015. Just the highlighted portion.
This is where there’s an audio deficit, because Dean, you had a huge grin on your face while you were reading the first part of that story.
Oh, because it’s exactly what everybody thought at the time, and I’m sitting here reading it while Donald Trump has been president for three years and is in the middle of an impeachment trial.
Look, nobody took Donald Trump seriously as a presidential candidate. I’ll be the first to admit that. Of course, nobody thought — by the way, I don’t think he thought he was going to win the nomination or win the presidency. So look, I mean, that captures the moment.
The reality was Donald Trump was a long shot. I don’t look back at that characterization from June 2015 and say it was a mistake. Alex even opens the possibility that he would at least be a disruptive force.
Right. Do you think it’s fair to say that, like with Sanders, the media saw Trump’s candidacy as unlikely, but unlike with Sanders, there was a tremendous amount of attention paid to it, not out of a belief that Donald Trump could win, but more out of an interest in what I might call the kind of stunning unorthodoxy of the candidacy, the ways in which it broke all of our understandings of the rules.
Yeah. I mean, I can answer that from the — I mean, I don’t know if you want me to answer that about the media or about The New York Times. I think about the media writ large, of course I think he was an irresistible television candidate. He just was. He was funny, he was charming. I do think the press — and now I’m talking about The New York Times — while we didn’t think he could win, that did not keep us from, if I can be frank, putting a lot of energy into digging into him as a candidate. And to me, that’s the test, right? We examined his real estate holdings extensively. We were the first to extensively — and you were part of it, actually — to examine allegations of his mistreatment of women. We broke the story that he barely paid taxes. So this didn’t keep us from covering him aggressively.
Mm-hm. We just didn’t think he stood a chance.
Yeah. Oh no, at the moment of “Access Hollywood” tape, I thought, how could he win? How could he possibly win?
Right. So that’s about us not really understanding the voters.
So here is the — I almost think that the Sanders and the Trump coverage is all of a piece. I think that we — and I don’t think this is just The New York Times, but I’m going to wear the hat for The New York Times. I think that the combination of post-economic crisis, and a sense that there are parts of America that were still shaken by the economic crisis, I think a lot of Americans — more Americans than we understood at the time — were rattled and were looking for something dramatic.
And that desire for something dramatic was reflected in the rise of Bernie Sanders, and it was certainly reflected in the rise of Donald Trump. It was certainly reflected in the fact that Hillary Clinton came across, rolled onto the landscape — as did Jeb Bush, by the way — as names that had been looming on the American political scene for what seemed like forever.
Which, fairly or unfairly, made them seem like part of the elite. And I don’t think we — I don’t think anybody quite got it.
— not understanding the voters, how much that has to do with our sources. I know, as a political reporter, how much I used to call figures within the party establishment, operatives, party leaders.
And those become important sources in how you think about the party and the candidate. And of course, we know now that the Democratic establishment clearly favored Clinton over Sanders.
He was an independent.
He wasn’t really a member of the Democratic Party, and they didn’t want him to win. And we know that the Republican establishment was horrified at the idea of Donald Trump being their nominee.
Of Donald Trump, yeah.
And looking back, I think on some level, we took the establishment as experts on their party’s candidates and a barometer of the way people in the party felt, when in fact, they had their own motivations, right?
— on the way we understood the situation. What do you think of that?
I think that’s true. Coupled with, we weren’t out in the country enough.
Mm-hm. So there came a moment where I would say that evidence on the ground started to contradict the assumptions that we’re talking about here.
And that was once the voting actually got underway in the primaries.
Sanders overwhelmingly won New Hampshire by a margin that really surprised us. Trump again sweeping the primaries.
Won New Hampshire, then South Carolina then Nevada. Do you think that the newsroom adequately responded to what was happening at that point on the ground?
Yes and no. Yes, the newsroom. if we didn’t take Donald Trump seriously as a candidate beforehand and dig into him, as I recall, I had more people digging into him at that point. Suddenly, he was a serious person, and my recollection is we turned up the volume on him considerably and digging into his business dealings, his casinos, his losses, his finances. So I do think we adjusted on him. Do I think we adjusted on Bernie Sanders? I mean, it certainly felt at that moment — I don’t remember specifics. It certainly felt at that moment that both these guys were being taken more seriously.
Yes, I’m not pulling back from my idea that we didn’t quite have a finger on the country, but I do think we started treating them more seriously, yes.
And you’re leaving open the possibility that perhaps, when it came to Bernie Sanders, we weren’t as nimble as we were with Trump?
Again, the framing of her.
— yeah, well, the framing of — by the way, for the record, that framing was right. She was the front-runner. She had all the money. She had the machine. She ultimately won the nomination. She also won the popular vote. So when Sanders rose, it was because of two things, obviously, right? The country was a little more radically inclined than we thought, but it also meant that Hillary Clinton wasn’t quite the perfect candidate that we thought. So I do think we started looking harder at that moment at the chinks in her armor, sure.
— but not the country, the people voting for them.
We hadn’t learned that lesson yet.
Yes, I think that’s right. I think that’s the biggest — my biggest self-criticism, which is that of course we covered the country, you’ll see voters’ stories. But I don’t think we quite — we did we did not dig in and say, why is this country pushing ahead with these two very unusual candidates, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders? I don’t think we quite understood that.
Mm-hm. Well, so I’ve been speaking with some of our colleagues ahead of this conversation, anticipating it, surreptitiously reaching out.
I am kidding, of course.
And one of the observations that some of them had is that stories about the voters and the country were being written, as you suggested.
— in the same way that the candidate stories were.
That’s absolutely correct. That’s absolutely correct. That’s the tangible evidence of what I’m conceding, what I’m saying. There were reporters — this is not an — I mean, from where I sit, all roads lead to the executive editor, right? No, there were reporters out in the country who were writing stories about what was going on in the country. But we didn’t elevate them and say, wait a minute, there’s something powerful going on here. We didn’t see that.
So let’s talk about the final assumption.
What happens once Clinton secures the nomination — Democratic nomination — and Trump gets the Republican nomination? Which is the assumption that Clinton will win, and she will likely win big. And here, Dean, is where I want to reference not our writing but our podcasting. This also marks the moment where The Times created an audio department, thank you.
And I came on three months before the election to host a little podcast called The Run-Up. And our first-ever episode in August 2016 was called quote, “Landslide.” And let’s just say that it was not about the potential prospect of a Donald Trump landslide.
So mea culpa from this side of the table. What do you think was going on here, once we reached this moment, Clinton nominee, Trump nominee? Why had we not learned from the primary that Trump was not to be underestimated?
Yeah. You know, it sure looked like he was going to lose. He was a deeply flawed candidate. I had reporters during the build up to the election with Mitch McConnell and others, and I was calling them up all the time.
And McConnell, all of them were saying, it sure looks like he’s going to lose. The question is by how much. We bought into that. Some of that was calling — it’s everything we’re talking about. It’s calling the experts. It was not having a handle on the country. All that stuff came together in those last days.
So I want to talk for just a quick second about the Clinton emails in this context.
— by Russia and disseminated on WikiLeaks.
— to get those emails. We didn’t have to publish them.
Yeah. People forget they were news — they were big stories in those emails.
There were big stories.
Important stories in those emails.
There were important stories. They were less important stories. I remember I looked up a couple days ago, one story that was just basically a highlights to the sexiest tidbits.
Yeah, no. But there were stories about the turmoil in her campaign, her speeches. There were real stories in there.
Yes, there was. But were we applying perhaps more scrutiny to her campaign because we were covering her, in a sense, as if she were the president-in-waiting, and we wanted to apply the kind of scrutiny that you would to such a person?
— Russia — because now we know.
Yeah, well we didn’t. First off, let’s remember we didn’t know Russia.
We knew, we knew they were ill-gotten.
Yeah, well of course we knew they were ill-gotten. By the way, the original WikiLeaks documents years before, which led to the Arab Spring, were also ill-gotten. The Snowden tapes were also ill-gotten, the Snowden documents.
Two of those relate to questions of national security and national interest.
Yeah. No, that’s right.
And one to a candidate’s inner workings and seem much more designed to inflict political damage.
That’s right. So here’s my view, and I understand it may not be popular. When journalists learn things that we think are important — and I think some of the stuff about the Hillary Clinton campaign were important — when we learn important things, to not publish is a political act.
It’s not a journalistic act.
— a form of politics.
When you learn something, there should not be a whole lot that we learn about important stories that we don’t publish. My view is that publishing is journalism. Not publishing is political balancing.
I think — and I hear the next question because I’ve gotten it. The next big document dump comes in about something, anything. I’ve even seen other journalists say, I hope we understand that we can’t publish that stuff. No, I will read it. We will evaluate it. We will look at it in the new context that we understand, which is Russia is actively trying to influence American elections. That will be part of the calculation. But the calculation cannot be, we’re just not going to publish because that would screw up American politics. You know, at that point, I will go into business as like a campaign adviser to people and not as a journalist.
If such a leak as happened in 2016 happens this time around, and if we believe that it is an act of a foreign government attempting to influence our election — as it turned out to be in 2016 — will we apply a different standard to reporting on stolen materials?
Sure, sure. We will have — we will take all of these things into account and debate. So if I walk back to my office today and there’s a batch of documents that show all kinds of stuff about Donald Trump, or all kinds of stuff about Joe Biden, etc., etc., we will know in the back of our minds that we’re being manipulated.
— more interesting. And I’m sure the debate will be more fierce than it was in 2016. But in the end, if there is information in there the American public should know, we’ll publish it. And that’s what we do.
So Dean, at long last, let’s go to election night 2016.
I remember shock. I remember presiding over the — I don’t know if you remember this, if you were there — presiding over the meeting two days before the election, and they were showing us the “Hillary Clinton Wins” front page.
And I said — not because I foresaw the future, but because executive editors think about all possibilities of screw-ups — I said, do we have a “Trump Wins” one? It was as if I had gotten up and started telling knock-knock jokes in the middle of the meeting. Everybody just chuckled. And I ordered one up. I’m not even sure it was ever done.
But nobody — but the room was like, oh my god? It was like, do we have to humor this guy?
So I can confirm your memory that we did not have a full package of Trump winning stories ready. We had a relatively short story. And beyond that, I think, 500 or so words, there was virtually nothing else. And the reason I know this intimately is because when Trump started to pull ahead and it became clear he might win, I was drawn into turning that 500-word story, along with Matt Flegenheimer, into what would become the next day’s almost 2,000-word story.
Which was kind of a brand new front page story. And the online headline was, quote, “Donald Trump is elected president in a stunning repudiation of the establishment.” And in the confusion of that moment, and I’m not upset about it at all, Matt and my byline did not show up on the story.
The Clinton victory authors got the byline.
Even though we wrote the story.
I said newspapers were flawed.
But it felt in that moment like our assumptions had truly guided us all the way to the final moments of election night.
And then they had been burst.
Yeah of course, that’s true. I think, if I can say one thing about journalism, though. We do have a tendency to beat ourselves up a little bit too much.
Yes, I don’t think we had a handle on the turmoil in the country. Something surprising and shocking happened with the election of Donald Trump. And it would be a little bit too narcissistic to — I’m not talking about your question.
I’m talking about the exercise of — it’s a little narcissistic for my taste to spend forever beating ourselves up over it. It was a very unlikely, unlike any other presidential candidate in my lifetime, and probably forever, who walked in and captured the country at a particular moment. And some things you can anticipate, but there are 300 million Americans. Some things you can’t anticipate.
Right. You used the word “narcissistic,” and I’m not judging that.
— to the country what we learned.
Because of course, and I know you believe this, but I’m just going to articulate it. It’s no small thing.
And the implications are still playing out.
Oh, of course. And it changed journalism. I mean, that election changed journalism. It was historic in a lot of ways.
I also think when I say “narcissistic,” I’m just saying there’s a fine line between understanding it and also understanding that something giant happened. And while we should change our rules to understand it, to keep from missing a story like that in the future, I don’t think we should go into it with the assumption that all of our rules are wrong.
That’s all I mean.
— it feels clear that the source of these assumptions was, in very large part, a kind of institutional decision to cover the candidates so heavily and to not cover, as much or as prominently, the country. So with that in mind — Mm-hm. — what do you think the biggest changes have been to the coverage this time around, 2020?
Yeah. So we’ve done a whole series of stories from out in the country. We’ve brought in people from the business staff to go out to the country to talk about the effects of the economy. We are about to announce a plan to put writers in seven or eight states that we’re usually not in. We have added to our regular political staff a religion writer.
 And we give huge play now to stories about anxiety in the country. I think if you read The New York Times right now, you read a New York Times that reflects a country that’s in some turmoil, a country that’s divided much more than we understood in 2016. We have doubled the number of people who cover the internet. We used to cover the internet as a series of companies vying for control.
— and its political beliefs as profoundly as anything.
That’s right. It’s a dramatically different setup.
And I don’t think we’ve labeled any — the campaigns would disagree — but I don’t think we’ve made anybody feel like the inevitable candidate.
Or the long shot.
Or the long shot. I am extremely proud of where our coverage is right now, and nobody’s even voted yet.
I’m also mindful that, like politics, journalism can feel a little bit like a pendulum swinging side to side.
And I wonder if there’s a danger of overcorrection here, by which I mean over-coverage of basically what’s known as the Trump base in the United States. After 2016, there was an understandable emphasis on understanding Trump voters.
Do you see any risk in giving those voters and those Trump allies, and even the president himself, too much of a platform in pursuit of that understanding, and over-representing their perspective? And maybe as a result, missing the many other perspectives that are out there in the process?
I don’t. Not as long as you write about the other perspective, not as long as you write about black people who are anxious about Trump and love Joe Biden. I don’t. Look, one of the greatest puzzles of 2016 remains a great puzzle. Why did millions and millions of Americans vote for a guy who’s such an unusual candidate? Why did people who are very religious vote for a guy who’s been married three times, I think? Those puzzles are reporting targets. And I know that every time we go out and we ask people questions about that, they’re trying to understand it. People roll their eyes and say, why are you going to talk to those people? Because understanding how those people voted and how they will vote in the future is a big and important thing. And to dismiss them as a group of 35, 40 percent of Americans — that’s a hell of a thing to dismiss — who should not be in our pages, that’s not journalistic to me.
— what we learned in 2016. Which is, there’s justifiably a very significant focus on the economic grievances, the white, working class, for example, Midwestern voter.
We tell that story a lot.
— as much as anything in the economy.
Right? There may be Democrats who support universal health care and taxing the rich, but they oppose open borders.
They oppose abortion.
They oppose the culture of political correctness.
And it’s very challenging to capture that.
Do you think that we’re capturing that?
I do. I think we are capturing it. We have done much more. I want to keep doing more. I think that there are — so it’s always funny for me to be called — I always feel weird being called a member of the political elite. You know, I’m a black guy who grew up in a poor neighborhood in New Orleans in a religious Catholic family.
“And it is really hard for me to vote for somebody who’s going to support abortion.” And I was sitting there and I was thinking, “My god, this is the way my mother felt. Abortion is a sin. I can’t vote for somebody who feels otherwise.” So I think that there is a big chunk of America for whom that’s a big deal.
Cultural issues are a big deal.
I’m sure you’re familiar with this phrase.
This tendency to represent both sides of a debate as equal or both sides as having contributed equally to something.
And there was a story a couple weeks ago about the impeachment inquiry that was criticized for this. And I read it very carefully. And among the lines people zeroed in on was this: “Throughout the committee’s debate, the lawmakers from the two parties could not even agree on the basic set of facts in front of them.” The criticism was, there can only be one set of facts, so lay them out.
Another point the article, it read, quote, “They called each other liars and demagogues, and accused each other of being desperate and unfair.” The criticism of that is that we can tell who is lying or who is not lying based on the testimony and the evidence that we have. But the story didn’t do that. It suggested both sides had legitimate, equal cases. Are stories like that are kind of bothsideism abdication?
— for sophisticated objectivity. I think that we’re at a moment where people very much want us to take sides. And I don’t think that’s the right stance for The New York Times. I do think about the person who picks up his paper in the morning and just wants to know what happened. I do think that we have an obligation to that person, and I do fear that we’re pretending that we don’t have that obligation I do think that American journalism has a tendency to go for the easy version of what I call “sophisticated true objectivity.” And the easy version is, “I’m writing my Syrian deadline. O.K., this guy said this. This guy said that. I’ll put them together. You decide.” That’s not what I mean when I say “sophisticated true objectivity” as a goal. True objectivity is you listen, you’re empathetic. If you hear stuff you disagree with, but it’s factual and it’s worth people hearing, you write about it. Does The New York Times and every news organization, in producing tons of stories on deadline, fall into “on the one hand, on the other hand?” Absolutely. Because when you cover a trial and when you cover some kinds of stories, that’s an O.K. formula. It’s not the best formula for covering Donald Trump and the impeachment trial.
And I do think that bothsiderism and too easily saying “on the one hand, on the other hand” is not healthy for the discussion that we’re having.
— who are you talking about? Can you explain that a little more?
Look, I mean, there are different gradations, but many of our readers hate Donald Trump and want us to join the opposition to Donald Trump, right? Well, I’m not going to do that. And then there are people who disagree, understandably, with what I described as a sophisticated objectivity. There are people on our staff who disagree with that as a goal. I get that. I really do. That premise of sophisticated objectivity and independence, we should always debate it and question it.
But I think that that view — that in my mind, I think of the reader who just wants to pick up his paper in the morning and know what the hell happened. I’m beholden to that reader, and I feel obligated to tell that reader what happened.
But where do you draw the line between picking a side and holding truth to power? Because at this point — I think this is important — there’s a well-documented pattern of President Trump, some of his allies, and supporters denying established facts.
— than the Democrats and the Democratic Party. And do you think our journalism has sufficiently adjusted to that reality? And how central should that understanding and that reality be to our 2020 coverage.
— of the way the truth is being handled by the two parties.
I think of Republican senators out there saying what they’re saying.
O.K. Yes, on climate change and other — but I think Donald Trump is the extreme version of that. Donald Trump has made it his business to attack all of the independent arbiters of fact. And I think that you will find in the pages of The New York Times very powerful reporting that illustrates that.  That’s the language, the word. But the reporting, there’s no question we have done that.
Or a racist.
— asked you to do.
Yes, I mean, there was a big debate in our newsroom and outside our newsroom about whether The New York Times should use the word “racist.” And I accept disagreement. My view is, the most powerful writing lets the person talk, lets the person say what he has to say. And it is usually so evident that what the person has to say is racist or anti-Semitic, that to actually get in the way and say it yourself is less powerful. The one thing I will do is, I will pull a little bit of rank. As a black guy who grew up in the South in the 1960s, who has been actually literally called some of the names, the most powerful way to show these things is to actually just show them. The best piece of writing I’ve read about a racist community was Joseph Lelyveld’s portrait of Philadelphia, Mississippi in the 1960s.
This was your predecessor and your mentor.
Predecessor and mentor. In his story about Philadelphia, Mississippi, he begins with a guy on the front porch, essentially saying, “This is all bull. We’re not racist here in Philadelphia, Mississippi.” And an old black guy walks by, and he calls him “boy.” If that story had led with “Philadelphia, Mississippi is filled with racists,” I wouldn’t have read the second paragraph.
Mm-hm. You would wouldn’t be remembering it.
I wouldn’t be remember. It was letting people talk, showing what they had to say. And you put that paper down and said, man, that is a portrait of a racist community.
And to me, that is just more powerful.
— spreading disinformation — without appearing to ignore or disparage the very voters who embraced him in 2016, continue to embrace him now, suggesting that we have picked a side?
Yeah. This is hard. I will acknowledge, this is hard.  And when they say something that’s false — I mean, we’ve done two or three reconstructs of what happened with the U.S. attack on the Iranian general that shows that some of the descriptions were false.
That’s reporting. That’s not like labeling and cheap analysis. That’s deep reporting. A lot of reporters. That’s my answer to how we cover Donald Trump.

 The world today is filled with pundits. The world today is filled with people who can use labels. The world today has very few institutions that can go out and do the reporting independently, powerfully. And that’s what I want to do. And then in terms of his voters, I think you show up. There’s nothing more powerful to convince somebody that you want to listen than showing up.   That does not mean giving voice to racists. I’m not talking about that. I’m talking about the big unanswered question of 2016 for all of our hand-wringing and all the discussion, is why did so many millions of Americans vote for this very unusual candidate? I don’t think anybody has fully answered it. And I think one of our goals should be to come as close as we can.
— or their country.
— we don’t fully understand it, right?
So do we recognize in light of what happened in 2016, about the way assumptions coursed through our veins, influenced our coverage, that we now have an electorate that is trying to sort through the results of that, trying to make sense of it? And does that create a special obligation to get it as right as possible, to show a certain amount of restraint?
To show a tremendous amount of care and nuance?
Yes, I think there’s a particular obligation we have to not jump to conclusions, to not make people inevitable and to hold back and war against the assumptions of the political class, right? The political class that said Trump couldn’t win, and Hillary Clinton couldn’t be beat. Yes, I think we have an obligation to guard against drawing those conclusions too quickly.
I do think we have to keep reminding ourselves that what happened in 2016 was a remarkable, a remarkable upset and moment. But yes, I think we have an obligation not to jump to conclusions, and not to declare anybody inevitable.
— that is really about all of this.
The lessons of 2016. And each week, we’re going to be going somewhere new in the country.
With a political reporter from The Times, and with national reporters from The Times. To talk to people, and to listen, to do it, in your words, empathetically. And to do our part to make sure that we are not guided by assumptions.
That’s great. That’s terrific. That feels like an important contribution to not only our coverage but coverage of American politics. That’s great.
O.K. Well that’s an honor.
— that we’re having with the country.
It’s a good conversation to have.
Not just for being here, but for being here and being very candid.
Thank you. Thank you. Thanks for having me.
Here’s what else you need to know today. Late Thursday night, Republican Senator Lamar Alexander, who was seen as the deciding vote on whether new witnesses would be heard in the impeachment trial, said he would vote against calling such witnesses. Alexander’s announcement could be a fatal blow to Democratic hopes of calling witnesses, like former national security adviser, John Bolton, who appears to have damning testimony against President Trump. Just two Republican senators, Susan Collins and Mitt Romney, say they will vote for witnesses, but Democrats need the support of four Republican senators. If no witnesses are called, the trial could be over in a matter of days.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcolm, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lindsey Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges, Luke Vander Ploeg, Adizah Eghan, Kelly Prime, Julia Longoria, Sindhu Gnanasambandan, Jazmin Aguilera, MJ Davis Lin, Austin Mitchell, Sayre Quevedo, Neena Pathak, Dan Powell, Dave Shaw, Sydney Harper, Daniel Guillemette and Hans Buetow. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Lauren Jackson and Julia Simon.
That’s it for “The Daily.” I’m Michael Barbaro. See you on Monday in Iowa.
Elite conversations are nothing new in politics, going back to the days when columnists like Robert Novak wielded huge power. But Twitter’s rise coincided with a vogue for “tipsheet journalism,” in Mr. Hamby’s phrase: the who’s-up-who’s-down reporting that prizes tidbits over deeper dives.
That advice goes for editors, too. “The worst thing you can do to a reporter is: ‘Oh, my God, did you see this tweet? Can you write it up?’” Mr. Smith of BuzzFeed said.
“Otherwise known as, every day covering the White House,” quipped Margaret Talev, who covers Mr. Trump for Bloomberg News.
Or, as Amy Walter, national editor of The Cook Political Report, put it, reporters talking about polls are a lot like preteens talking about sex.
“They know all the words. They talk about it a lot. But they have no idea what they’re talking about,” she said.
Polling is crucial for campaign coverage, but in 2016 the attention on number-crunching sites like FiveThirtyEight led to a conflation of reporting and forecasting. (For some readers, the election night “needle” on The New York Times’s home page remains a source of post-traumatic stress.) Journalists here said news organizations had an obligation to be clear that polls are about probability, not prophecy.
Mrs. Clinton’s pollster, Joel Benenson, expressed frustration that coverage of noisy horse-race polls last time around obscured broader trends. He urged reporters to weigh polling data with their own observations, like the language voters use to describe candidates.
Some news organizations are refocusing. HuffPost, whose forecasting model gave Mrs. Clinton a 98.2 percent chance of victory hours before Election Day, plans to analyze others’ polls in 2020, but will not be modeling its own.
Expertise is a coin of the realm among political journalists. But overconfidence can keep reporters from seeing what’s in front of them. Mr. Axelrod warned that polling numbers, for instance, can be warped to justify a reporter’s assumptions, right or wrong.
And with more than 18 months to go before Election Day, extrapolating any conclusions seems a losing game. “Trump showed us that we simply don’t know what a viable presidential candidate looks like,” said Eliana Y. Johnson, a reporter at Politico.
For reporters seeking a three-dimensional view of a campaign, the smartest path may be one of moderation.
Follow Twitter for “a directional sense of where the conversation is headed,” as Mr. Smith said. Keep track of political shoptalk, like consultant hires and ad buys. Read polls, but understand their limits. Talk to as many voters as possible, in as many places as possible.
And expect the 2020 campaign to be like nothing you’ve ever seen.
