The police released video footage in response to calls for transparency over last week’s shooting in New Haven by a Yale officer and a Hamden, Conn., officer.
The footage from a police body camera shows an officer drawing his gun and approaching a red Honda Civic near Yale University in New Haven. A black man with dreadlocks is seen stepping out of the car and raising his hands into the air.
Almost instantly, the police officer appears to start shooting. He moves to the side of the car and continues to fire his weapon, shattering the passenger-side window. As he retreats, the sound on his body-cam kicks in.
“Twenty shots fired. Argyle street. With the car, with the car,” Officer Devin Eaton of the Hamden Police Department is heard shouting. A police officer from Yale University had approached from a different angle, and in a separate surveillance video is shown firing his weapon several times.
Connecticut State Police released the footage on Tuesday in response to persistent questions and calls for transparency over the April 16 shooting that took place about a mile from Yale and has prompted a week of protests.
The driver of the Honda Civic, Paul Witherspoon III, 21, was not injured. The passenger, Stephanie Washington, 22, was shot but not critically injured, the authorities said.
Neither was armed, and both officers, who are both black, have been placed on leave while the shooting is investigated by the State Police and the state’s attorney’s office.
James Rovella, the commissioner of the state Department of Emergency Services and Public Protection, said in a news conference on Tuesday that Mr. Witherspoon appeared to be complying with police orders in the video, but that one of his hands had not been visible. Mr. Rovella said Officer Eaton fired 13 shots in the encounter, and the Yale officer, Terrance Pollock, fired three times, The Associated Press reported.
Protesters on Yale’s campus and in the neighboring community have demanded justice in a shooting they say is the latest example of police officers firing at unarmed black civilians without sufficient cause.
Demonstrators have gathered almost daily at the site of the shooting and outside the home of Yale’s president, Peter Salovey. Mr. Salovey sent a letter to the Yale community the day after the shooting, calling on people to refrain from drawing conclusions until both Yale and the state completed investigations.
“As we wait to learn more about this incident, let us treat each other with respect and decency, and with a sense of common purpose,” he wrote.
On the night of the shooting, the two officers had responded to a call that indicated Mr. Witherspoon may have been fleeing from an attempted armed robbery, Mr. Rovella said.
An attendant at the Go On gas station on Arch Street in Hamden had called 911 at 4:20 a.m., and reported that an African-American man with dreadlocks had pulled a gun on a newspaper delivery man outside the station and had asked him for money. The attendant gave the police a license plate number.
The police responded, and tracked the man’s car as it passed into neighboring New Haven. An officer with the Yale police responded as well, and the two initiated a stop.
Neither the body-cam footage, nor two security-camera videos released earlier by the police, offer clarity on why the officers began shooting. In earlier statements to reporters, Josue Dorelus, a Connecticut state trooper, said that Mr. Witherspoon had “abruptly” left his car, but the video released on Tuesday does not appear to match that description.
Neither officer followed correct police protocol with their body cameras, Mr. Rovella said. Officer Pollock, a 16-year veteran of Yale’s police force, never turned his camera on, he said. Officer Eaton only turned on his camera after the shooting, but a special “recall” feature allowed it to capture the earlier images, he said.
Despite the initial call about an attempted robbery, police said no charges have been filed against either Mr. Witherspoon or his girlfriend, Ms. Washington.
Mike Dolan, a lawyer for Mr. Witherspoon, said that his client had gotten into a verbal disagreement at the gas station, but that was all.
The body-camera footage is difficult to follow when watched at full speed. When slowed down, Mr. Witherspoon can be seen more clearly standing up with his arms raised after being stopped by the police.
“For this young man to be ordered out of his car, and get out of his car with his hands up, and then for the officer to begin to fire, it is devastating, for me and for the community,” the Rev. Dr. Boise Kimber, pastor of the First Calvary Baptist Church in New Haven, said on Wednesday in an interview.
Pastor Kimber said that he and a coalition of clergy members were planning to lead another protest on Thursday to Mr. Salovey’s house and office, to demand that Officer Pollock be fired and for Yale to take steps to improve the relationship between the campus and the community.
