Prime Minister Jacinda Ardern of New Zealand spoke to Parliament about the survivors of two mosque shootings. New Zealand has now passed a law banning most semiautomatic weapons.
We are here because of the victims and families. And I have to reflect, Mr. Speaker, but when I visited the hospitals and the victims that none of them had just one gunshot wound. I struggled to recall any single gunshot wounds. In every case, they spoke of multiple injuries, multiple debilitating injuries, that deemed it impossible for them to recover in days, let alone weeks, Mr. Speaker. They will carry disabilities for a lifetime, and that’s before you consider the psychological impact. We are here because of them. And I believe that they are here with us, supporting what we are doing here today, as well, because these weapons were designed to kill. And they were designed to maim, and that is what they did on the 15th of March.
WELLINGTON, New Zealand — Less than a month after 50 Muslim worshipers in the city of Christchurch were fatally shot in terrorist attacks on two mosques, New Zealand passed a law banning most semiautomatic weapons on Wednesday — a measure supported by all but one of Parliament’s 120 lawmakers.
Many Americans can buy a gun in less than an hour. In some countries, the process can take weeks or months.
The law outlaws military-style semiautomatic weapons and assault rifles, and violators face five years in prison. Some semiautomatic guns will still be allowed, including .22-caliber rifles with magazines holding fewer than 10 rounds, and shotguns with internal magazines that hold no more than five rounds. All of the weapons used by the Christchurch gunman will be banned, as well as parts and magazines that can convert lower-powered guns to higher-powered versions.
In her speech, Ms. Ardern, who leads the center-left Labour Party, choked up when she talked about visiting surviving victims at Christchurch Hospital. In addition to those killed, 50 people were injured in the attack.
This time, the bill quickly sailed through Parliament. Usually in New Zealand, new laws can take around six months to pass after they are introduced. More than 13,000 people submitted opinions to the government — 60 percent in support of the ban — and some were invited to speak to lawmakers in a single day of public hearings.
But while sports shooters and farmers were among those who pleaded for exemptions to the restrictions, lawmakers allowed just two: for commercial pest-control businesses and for licensed collectors of guns, or those who want to keep particular guns as heirlooms or mementos. Collectors will be required to remove a part, making the weapons nonoperational, and store that part at a different location.
Ms. Ardern’s center-right opponents used their speeches on Wednesday to praise her leadership since the March 15 attacks and voice their support for the changes. Just one, David Seymour, the leader of the libertarian ACT Party, voted against the law.
Mr. Seymour said he was not opposed to more restrictive gun laws but believed that Parliament had rushed the process. “It is not an attempt to improve public safety, it is an exercise in political theater,” said Mr. Seymour, who argued that there was a risk of a growing black market in banned weapons.
