As Sri Lanka mourns around 250 people killed in a series of terrorist attacks by a group loyal to ISIS, there are fears that the grief will turn into more violence.
“Hello. I’m Emma Cott from The New York Times.” “How are you?” “Good. How are you?” “Fine.” “This is your father’s shop?” “Yes.” “Can we go in?” “Yeah. You come here.” “Wow. So, what was here before?” “And this happened when?” “Sunday. The day of the terrorist attack?” “Yeah. Between 7:30.” “In the evening.” “So the terrorist attack happened in the morning —” “— and this happened in the evening. Do you have any idea who was responsible?” Mohamed Ifaz and his father were born and raised in Sri Lanka. They live south of the capital city. Like most of the shopkeepers on this street, they’re Muslim, which could explain why their store was torched right after the terrorist attacks here. We traveled to Negombo, to the site of the deadliest of eight suicide bombings that ripped through this country on Easter morning. People here told us they’re now scared to gather, even to grieve. We came to witness a country in mourning, and to see what’s being done to prevent that grief from leading to more violence. Sri Lanka has a long history of ethnic tension. Nearly three decades of civil war ended in 2009, but that conflict was between Tamils, who are mostly Hindu, and the Sinhalese majority, who are mostly Buddhist. More recently, Buddhist extremists have attacked Muslims and Christians. And now, there’s a growing concern that Sunday’s bombings could create a new rift between those two minorities. The police tell us there’s a mosque that’s sheltering Muslim refugees from Pakistan and Afghanistan, who are fearing for their lives. “We heard that some families are living here that have been moved.” “Yeah, Pakistan families, yeah.” “O.K., the ones that have been moved since the bombings?” “Yeah.”  They’re sleeping on the floor and there’s almost no food, and they have no idea when it will be safe to go back to their homes. Reporter: “What happened to make you come here?” Reporter: “Somebody came to your house with knives and sticks?” Reporter: “People were outside your very house?” Reporter: “And what were they saying?” Only some of the people we talked to say they were actually threatened by mobs, but everyone is sharing stories, and the uneasiness spreads. Reporter: “You said Sri Lankan people were fighting at your house?” Reporter: “And saying what?” “You are —” Reporter: “And how was it before the Sunday attacks?” Reporter: “When you heard what?” We decide to head to a police station to see what the cops are doing to defuse tensions. “Nice to meet you. Thank you. Thank you for speaking with us.” But as soon as we arrive, an officer interrupts our meeting. Someone has called to report Muslims in the area. We rush out to see how police will respond. By the time we get there, a crowd has gathered outside an apartment. People tell us that the Muslims living there haven’t come out for days, which seems suspicious. Reporter: “Is this the family? They’re taking them in?” Minutes later, a family appears. This van will take them to the police station where they’ll be registered, then to the mosque where they’ll join the other refugees. It’s not safe for them to stay here anymore. [praying] Back in town, the funerals continue. As soon as one finishes, another begins. No one here is calling for revenge. There is only grief and shock. But a flier is distributed, urging survivors of the bombings not to lash out against their neighbors. The terrorists want to disrupt society by pitting one group against another. More violence would only give them what they want.
NEGOMBO, Sri Lanka — Auranzeb Zabi was cooking rice at a friend’s house on Wednesday when he heard angry shouting outside, looked out the window and saw a mob of Sri Lankan men carrying iron bars.
A day after the Islamic State claimed responsibility for suicide bombings that killed more than 350 people, Muslims in some areas of Sri Lanka were facing a rising backlash.
The mob surrounded the house. Mr. Zabi, a Pakistani refugee who has lived in Sri Lanka for two years, said he grabbed his two children, dashed into the yard and scampered over two walls before reaching an army checkpoint.
There the mob caught up with him, he said, and delivered a harsh beating, begging the soldiers to let them kill him. Hours later, Mr. Zabi still looked terrified.
“When you face 100 people,” he said, and then his voice slipped and he couldn’t finish the sentence. His eyes hardened.
“They even beat my kids,” he said.
In the town of Negombo, where an attack on a church during Easter services killed more than 100 people, gangs of Christian men moved from house to house, smashing windows, breaking down doors, dragging people into the streets, punching them in the face and then threatening to kill them, dozens of residents said. No deaths were reported, but many Muslims fear it is only a matter of time.
If one of the bombers’ goals in slaughtering hundreds of innocent men, women and children at hotels and churches on Easter Sunday was to stir new religious hatred in Sri Lanka, that may now be happening in some areas.
Despite pleas for calm from religious leaders of all faiths, tensions are rising and fear is traveling across this island nation like a fast-moving shadow. Many Muslims in different parts of the country say they are lying low and avoiding public places.
Until this week, Sri Lanka didn’t have much history of Christian-Muslim violence. The two faiths are small minorities: The country is about 7 percent Christian, 10 percent Muslim, 13 percent Hindu and 70 percent Buddhist.
Religion was not a driving factor in Sri Lanka’s decades-long civil war, in which ethnic tensions between the majority Sinhalese and minority Tamils nearly tore the country apart.
During the war years, many Muslim men rose up the ranks of the government’s intelligence services because they were known for their fluency in Sri Lanka’s three major languages — Sinhala, Tamil and English.
The deadly attacks on Easter Sunday marked a departure from the country's sectarian tensions, with a radical Islamist group targeting Christian minorities.
But after the civil war ended in 2009, militant Buddhism began to surge. Some observers have said it was as if powerful forces in Sri Lankan politics were looking for a new enemy to fight. Hard-line Buddhist monks targeted churches and mosques, priests and imams, often with the tacit support of the security services.
While Muslims bore the brunt of these attacks, Christians suffered, too, and the two communities were essentially on the same side. But that informal alliance was seriously challenged by Sunday’s attacks, which the authorities say were carried out by Muslim extremists, primarily against Christians.
In an instant, everything changed again, said Malik Farhan, another Pakistani refugee.
“We don’t feel safe anymore in Sri Lanka,” he said.
Many Muslims have tried to help grieving Christians, offering food and friendship, but the outreach has been complicated. Feelings are so raw that one priest told members of a mosque to stay away from the funerals.
On Wednesday, as Christian gangs roved their neighborhood, hundreds of Pakistani Muslims including Mr. Farhan and Mr. Zabi, rushed for protection first to a police station and then to a mosque. Soldiers and police officers guarded the mosque gates and checked the identification of any visitors. Still, elders felt uneasy about the location.
By late afternoon a string of buses chugged out of the mosque with every seat filled and people packed in the aisles, instantly relocating an entire community of Muslims to a small town miles away where none had ever lived.
The Pakistani refugees are easy targets. They look different, speak a different language and were already on unsure footing, living in Sri Lanka as guests of the government while refugee agencies sorted out longer-term resettlement plans.
They are members of the Ahmadiyya community, a relatively small Islamic sect that some orthodox Muslims consider heretics. In Pakistan, they have been persecuted relentlessly. But they are hardly the only members of Sri Lanka’s Muslim community who now feel frightened.
About two hours away, in the town of Bandaragama, Mohamed Iqbal, a Muslim man as Sri Lankan as anyone else, winced as he looked at his shoe shop.
He had run Shoe Fashion for 15 years and the few hundred dollars it generated each month supported his wife, his three adult sons and two grandchildren. But Shoe Fashion is no more.
It was gutted by fire the night of the suicide bombings — “obviously revenge,” a neighboring shopkeeper said. A rock lay on the ground that had been used to smash the lock and open the roll-top shutter. Inside, it still smelled like char.
Sri Lanka is a complicated tapestry of ethnicities and religions. Many Muslims said they have gotten used to discrimination operating in the background, even during the peaceful times.
In June 2014, after years of dehumanizing speech by hard-line Buddhist monks, religious bigotry exploded. Mobs of young Buddhist men attacked a Muslim neighborhood in a southern town, burning down houses, killing at least three Muslims and sending fear into just about every Muslim household in Sri Lanka.
Police officers were accused of standing by and sometimes even helping the Buddhist mobs. The Iqbal family wonders if the same is happening again.
On Wednesday, officials played down reports of violence, saying no one had been seriously hurt. The police said they were beefing up security around mosques and in Muslim neighborhoods, and trying to tamp down tensions.
