Ben Simmons played the role of villain with gleeful ease. Every time the Philadelphia guard touched the ball in Thursday’s Game 3 in Brooklyn, hearty boos followed, with each jeer seemingly energizing him.
After the Nets’ Jared Dudley air-balled an open 3-pointer in the third quarter, Simmons celebrated with outstretched arms. After a dunk, he hung on the rim so long that the backboard swayed with aftershocks. When Dudley challenged a call, Simmons laughed in the veteran’s face.
In the end, Simmons had the last laugh, scoring 31 points as the 76ers won, 131-115, taking a lead of two games to one in the best-of-seven first-round N.B.A. playoff series.
With a smirk and plenty of cocksure drives to the basket, Simmons quieted the critics who questioned his shooting ability. He went 11-for-13 from the field and 9-of-11 from the free throw line, while chipping in nine assists.
In the absence of Joel Embiid, the team’s starting center who was ruled out about 15 minutes before the game because of knee tendinitis, the 76ers showed that they have plenty of other star power. Tobias Harris, who had struggled in the previous two games, finished with 29 points and J.J. Redick had 26.
“We have the pieces to complete games,” Simmons said.
Philadelphia controlled the game, though the scrappy Nets fought back time and again until the final minutes. D’Angelo Russell and Caris LeVert tied for the team high with 26 points, but LeVert stood out to Coach Kenny Atkinson. “He was our sole offensive force out there,” Atkinson said.
After winning Game 1, the Nets had dreams of a series upset, but after two thorough defeats, Brooklyn’s chances of advancing seem increasingly unlikely.
Before Game 3, Embiid admitted: “I probably should’ve been ejected. I saw the play, and that was a bad play.” The foul was ruled a Flagrant 1; a Flagrant 2 would have resulted in an ejection.
Brown acknowledged that while Simmons, the team’s second-year star and the N.B.A.’s reigning Rookie of the Year, tended to shine in transition, he often struggled in the half court.
“It’s evolving,” Brown said, pointing out that Simmons is just 22.
The boos helped as well.
After the game, Simmons took off the black hat and played nice. When asked about his rebuttal to the “average” remark, and about the boos, he shrugged. “I’m not going to worry about it,” he said.
