WASHINGTON — Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota raised more than $5.2 million over the first seven weeks of her presidential bid, her campaign said on Monday, though that sum includes an undisclosed amount she could spend only in a general election campaign, not in the Democratic primary.
Her total, for the first quarter of the year, puts her well short of the strongest fund-raisers in the Democratic field.
Senator Bernie Sanders of Vermont leads the field with a total of $18.2 million raised in the first quarter, his campaign said last week. Senator Kamala Harris of California raised $12 million, former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas raised $9.4 million, and Pete Buttigieg, the mayor of South Bend, Ind., raised more than $7 million, according to announcements from their campaigns.
Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey said on Sunday that he had raised more than $5 million since the beginning of February. Another Democratic candidate, Andrew Yang, a New York businessman, said last week that he had raised more than $1.7 million in the quarter.
Senator Amy Klobuchar, Democrat of Minnesota, is running for president. Ms. Klobuchar is hoping her Midwestern roots and history of working across the aisle will help her candidacy.
Ms. Klobuchar’s campaign said its average online donation was $40, and that 85 percent of all contributors gave less than $100.
Not all of the money raised by Ms. Klobuchar is available to her during this phase of the presidential race. Candidates can collect a maximum of $2,800 from each individual donor for the primary and another $2,800 for the general election, but general election funds cannot be spent on expenses for the primary.
Ms. Klobuchar has solicited both primary and general election donations at fund-raising events, requesting up to $5,600 per donor, meaning that some portion of what she has raised cannot currently be used.
Ms. Harris, Mr. Buttigieg and Mr. Booker did not solicit general election donations in the first quarter, according to their campaigns. Mr. Sanders and Mr. O’Rourke did not hold fund-raising events in the quarter, relying on online donations, their campaigns have said.
Like other presidential contenders who have run for federal office before, Ms. Klobuchar is able to make use of funds she raised as a candidate in the past — in her case, from her Senate campaign account. Her presidential campaign said that she transferred more than $3 million from her Senate campaign, and that her presidential campaign had $7 million in cash on hand at the end of the quarter.
Presidential candidates must disclose their first-quarter fund-raising to the Federal Election Commission by April 15, but some campaigns reveal some information about their fund-raising before the deadline.