A century ago, Eugene V. Debs went to prison for his beliefs.
Mr. Isserman is a professor of history at Hamilton College.
One hundred years ago this month, the American Socialist leader Eugene V. Debs, reported to a penitentiary in Moundsville, W.V., to begin a 10-year prison term. Debs had been convicted the previous fall of violating the Espionage Act, which had been enacted shortly after the United States entered World War I with the ostensible aim of punishing citizens who provided aid to the enemy. By the time Debs went to prison, scores of his fellow Socialists had already been imprisoned under the act’s provisions.
Debs dedicated his career to showing that another, more equitable America was possible; a century later, as the country once again wrestles with the same question, it’s worth remembering what Debs tried to tell us.
Few of Debs’s acquaintances from his early days in Terre Haute could have predicted that he would someday face the grim prospect of spending his last years as a political prisoner. Before he turned 15, eager to contribute to his family’s uncertain finances, Debs dropped out of school and went to work in the local railroad yards. But he did not remain a manual laborer long. By the time he was 25, he was editor of the national magazine of the Brotherhood of Locomotive Firemen, then an important union of skilled railroad workers. By 30 he had won election as a Democrat to the Indiana Legislature. Given his intelligence and eloquence, his future seemed unbounded.
Debs’s views in those early Indiana days were those of a fairly conservative craft unionist, anchored in a vision of promoting social harmony between labor and capital. But by the early 1890s he had come to feel that craft unionism, which focused exclusively on the organization of skilled workers like the locomotive firemen (almost entirely white, native-born and male) was a dead end for the labor movement.
Instead he turned to industrial unionism, the strategy of organizing all workers in a given industry, regardless of skill, into a single organization. In 1893 he helped form and became president of the American Railway Union, which enjoyed a brief but phenomenal success, climaxing in the great Pullman strike of 1894. The strike was broken by federal troops, and Debs was subsequently thrown in prison for interfering with the mails. The union’s demise, and the six months he spent in jail, sent Debs on a political trajectory that in a few years’ time saw him emerge as the presidential standard-bearer for a small but growing Socialist movement.
Debs came to use his thin frame with effect. From the podium, his intense eyes and expressive face demanded attention while his long arms and torso eased or coiled in pace with his cadence … In the patriarchs of the Old Testament and in the angry Christ of the New, Debs found a prophetic model that … demanded no apologies for frank, even harsh, pronouncements. In the process he touched for the first time his powerful charismatic appeal with audiences.
Debs was exaggerating; that year, as a Socialist presidential candidate, he won just a 100,000 votes out of nearly 14 million cast. But in the presidential bids that followed, hyperbole began to edge toward prophecy.
Whether consciously or not, Debs drew on a strain of Protestant radicalism that stretched back to the founding days of Massachusetts Bay Colony, when Anne Hutchinson challenged the authority of the established ministry in that theocratic state in the famous “Antinomian controversy.” Antinomianism, literally “being against or opposed to the law,” was a term of abuse applied by orthodox Puritans to Hutchinson and her followers, who dared to assert a direct communication from God — or personal revelation — as the basis for their dissent.
Two centuries later, another Massachusetts radical, the abolitionist William Lloyd Garrison, promised in the first issue of his newspaper The Liberator to be “as harsh as truth, and as uncompromising as justice.” Frederick Douglass, John Brown, Elizabeth Cady Stanton and Margaret Sanger followed in the same tradition. So did Debs.
In Debs’s cell in Atlanta, where he was transferred after two months in West Virginia, the only picture he hung on the wall was of Christ on the cross.
The issue of war and peace was not one where Debs would equivocate; nor, as it turned out, would the federal government. Debs served less than three years of his 10-year sentence, but his health was broken. He never recovered, dying in 1926.
And so the prospects for a revived American Socialism remained for most of the ensuing century, in ashes. Whether a current generation of Socialists, new to the movement and growing in numbers, will find a way to weave together the redemptive promise of moral protest and the practical achievements of political action is still to be determined.
