Read Wednesday’s updates as we learn more about the shooting.
A man with a pistol walked into a classroom at the University of North Carolina at Charlotte late Tuesday afternoon and opened fire, fatally shooting two people and injuring four others on the last day of classes, the authorities said.
The police disarmed the suspect and took him into custody at a building on campus, Chief Jeff Baker of the U.N.C.C. Police and Public Safety Department said. The Charlotte-Mecklenburg Police Department identified the suspect as Trystan Andrew Terrell, 22.
On Wednesday, the university identified the six victims, all of whom were students. It said the two who were killed were Ellis Parlier, 19, of Midland, N.C., and Riley Howell, 21, of Waynesville, N.C.
The four students who were injured were Sean DeHart, 20, and Drew Pescaro, 19, both of Apex, N.C.; Emily Houpt, 23, of Charlotte; and Rami Alramadhan, 20, of Saudi Arabia.
Mr. Terrell was charged with two counts of murder, four counts of attempted murder, four counts of assault with a deadly weapon with intent to kill, possession of a firearm on an educational property and discharging a firearm on an educational property.
Just before 6 p.m., the campus’s office of emergency management reported that shots were fired near the Kennedy Building, an administrative building in the middle of campus.
Katie Ballard, 24, a graduate student in gerontology, was sitting in a classroom in a nearby building when her professor stepped out. The professor came back in and said she heard somebody had been shot. Then an alert popped up on a projector screen at the front of the class saying that gunshots had been fired close by.
Ms. Ballard ran with about 30 other students to an empty room nearby and locked the doors.
Ms. Ballard never heard any gunshots, but she heard helicopters buzzing while locked in the room. She heard students running up and down the halls. Through the window, she saw a man who had been shot in the abdomen. A handful of paramedics crouched around him, tending to his wounds.
A gunman killed two people and injured four others on the last day of classes at the University of North Carolina Charlotte. The police have taken a suspect into custody, but have not revealed a possible motive for the shooting.
Videos posted on Twitter showed police officers running in one direction while students streamed in the other direction.
It was the final day of classes for the school year, with graduation ceremonies scheduled for early May. Some students were getting ready for the summer break, and some were preparing to attend an on-campus concert featuring the rapper Waka Flocka Flame, which was canceled after the shooting.
Joan F. Lorden, the school’s provost and vice chancellor for academic affairs, said at a news conference late Tuesday evening that the school had canceled final exams through Sunday.
Gov. Roy Cooper of North Carolina said at the news conference that the state would take a “hard look” at how such shootings could be prevented in the future.
The episode was yet another in a series of deadly shootings that have made headlines across the United States. It happened three days after a gunman opened fire at a synagogue in Poway, Calif., killing a congregant there, and came on the heels of anniversaries of other deadly school shootings. It has been a little more than one year since 17 people were killed in Parkland, Fla., and two decades since 13 were killed at Columbine High School.
U.N.C. Charlotte is a public university with an enrollment of about 30,000. It is the largest postsecondary educational institution in the Charlotte area.