MEDIA, Penn. — The sounds that filter into George Crumb’s composition studio here are a typically suburban mix of placid and suddenly brash.
The occasional car skulks by on the leafy street outside. Visitors are greeted by vociferous barking from one of the shelter dogs rescued by Mr. Crumb and his wife of 70 years, Elizabeth. She keeps the radio on the classical music station most of the day, while their youngest son, Peter, who lives with them, blasts country in his bedroom upstairs.
The music Mr. Crumb has dreamed up in this home studio, a converted garage, over the decades is often peaceful and jolting, like his sonic environment. But his compositions unfold in another world that is dreamlike and sometimes nightmarish.
He continues to compose here even as he approaches his 90th birthday, coming in October. On Sunday and Tuesday, the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center gets in early on the celebration, presenting a two-concert tribute to Mr. Crumb at Alice Tully Hall. Included is the premiere of a new piece for percussion ensemble, as well as some of the classic works that have made him one of the most recognizable and beloved voices in contemporary music.
Among them are “Vox Balaenae,” which draws whale-like sounds from a flute, and the Vietnam War-haunted “Black Angels” for amplified string quartet, which one critic called “a work of frightening intensity, where Jimi Hendrix and Pierrot Lunaire shake hands with the devil.” In “Music for a Summer Evening,” for two pianos and percussion, the musicians become celebrants in a mesmerizing ritual that requires the pianists to reach deep into the instrument’s strings.
Mr. Crumb’s compositions inhabit a strange kind of suburbia themselves, a liminal space, rooted in the canon of Western music but venturing out into the world of natural sounds and acoustic phenomena. Echoes abound, whether from the careful manipulation of overtones and resonances or through the discreet halo created by metallic percussion. Mr. Crumb, who grew up in Charleston, W.Va., with the sound of a rushing river ricocheting off the surrounding hills, said early sound memories might have found a way into his music.
Fragments from other composers float through his works and settle in strange places. “Vox Balaenae” references the optimistic ascending brass fanfare of Strauss’s “Also Sprach Zarathustra,” but in so spectral a manner that it seems like a trick of the listener’s imagination.
For much of Mr. Crumb’s career, such quotations were anathema to the reigning modernist ethos. But the battles that raged in the middle of the 20th century between warring aesthetic movements seem to have passed him by. Asked whether he was ever criticized for writing tonal pieces or quoting Chopin, Mr. Crumb replied innocently.
That’s not to say Mr. Crumb makes it easy for performers. His scores are known to delight and terrify musicians in equal measure. The hand-drawn staves on his manuscripts sometimes curve into circles or break up into islands in a sea of white paper.
His works are loved by performers and audiences to a degree that few other living composers can match. Mr. Crumb counts over 20 recordings of his piano cycle “Makrokosmos” alone. Last fall, he received three new ones in the mail in the space of six weeks, made by pianists from Spain, Greece and Japan.
But it’s not just the notation that’s laborious for Mr. Crumb. Over a long career he has produced just around 50 pieces, a number he compared, with a wistful laugh, with the more than 600 Mozart wrote in a much shorter life. He has said his productivity dipped in the 1980s and into the ’90s as he devoted himself to teaching.
He gestured to the stacks of manuscript scores on his desk, with their custom-drawn staves and hand-lettered instructions.
