Style|Are You Ready for Drive-Thru Botox?
A new wave of beauty bars aims to make injectables as easy as a Drybar blowout.
There’s nothing secretive about getting Botox and fillers at Ject in the West Village.
In 2018, injections of Botox — the No. 1 aesthetic procedure since 1999, according to the American Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery — were up 16.3 percent from the year before. Fillers were up 12 percent in the same time frame. Both procedures require regular top-ups.
With that popularity comes, almost inevitably, a wave of places that specialize in these injections, aiming to make them as accessible (walk-ins welcome!), acceptable and fun (in name, if not in needle) as a Drybar blow-dry.
“Injectables don’t need to be scary, and they don’t need to be done in a secret garage,” said Gabrielle Garritano, a physician assistant and a founder of Ject. The curtains, she said, were a choice, to make the place feel more salon, less medical office — and so clients may see others getting injected.
“You see people getting their hair blown out,” she said, as if the two are equivalent.
A second location will open on the Upper East Side in May, and there are plans for NoLIta, then Miami, where the founder Dr. Alexander Blinski (he prefers “Dr. B”) grew up.
And BotoxLabb (the double Bs stand for “beauty bar”), a sea-foam-green-bathed chain based in Miami from the founders of the 1990s makeup brand Joey New York, is eyeing New York after introducing sea foam green outposts in Scottsdale, Ariz., and Los Angeles.
The company says that most of its clients are younger than 35, and many say they like the atmosphere of these places, and the focus on injectables.
Madeline Whaley, 29, an executive assistant in Beverly Hills, Calif., spotted an ad for Alchemy 43 (there are 43 muscles in the face, some researchers say) on Facebook and made the switch from a dermatologist.
According to the company, Alchemy customers spend an average of $475 per visit, and that figure is rising. As part of an initial consultation, Alchemy offers a 3-D sneak preview of what each treatment will look like on a client’s face.
No matter the beauty bar of choice, that first shot of Botox can be a gateway drug. Every consumer interviewed for this article acknowledged multiplying treatments, and wanting to ramp up frequency.
On a recent Friday night, Dr. Grubman collected 10 friends (male and female) for an injectables party at Ject. As guests nibbled vegan desserts from Jack’s, the Botox virgins got their treatments first to blunt the nervous anticipation.
Afterward, the party moved across the street to the Happiest Hour for drinks. Those with cheek fillers were perhaps marginally less happy. “When you laugh, it feels sore, but it’s not so horrible,” Dr. Grubman said.
What may get lost in all the merriment is that these are medical procedures with risks, and not all places have a doctor on-site. Rules about who can inject vary from state to state; New York allows physician assistants and registered nurses to do so.
Grant Stevens, the president of the American Society of Aesthetic Plastic Surgery, said he is less concerned about Botox than fillers. Complications can include a Spock eyebrow or a dropped lid from injecting the wrong muscle, but the effects are temporary.
Still, he notes that living with facial asymmetry even for a few months can interfere with one’s work and quality of life.
Fillers, however, can be injected into the wrong place — between blood vessels, for example — resulting in complications that can include blindness. “It’s not as rare as we would all like to think,” said Dr. Stevens, who admits to thinking about it every time he gets fillers.
He doesn’t think it’s necessary to have a doctor inject. (“Heresy!” he said, cheerfully.) But he suggests asking, at the very least, if your beauty bar of choice has a “crash cart,” which includes vials of a “doggone expensive” enzyme called hyaluronidase that can reverse an inadvertent intravascular injection of hyaluronic acid fillers like Restylane and Juvéderm. Fillers like Radiesse, which are made of other substances, are not reversible, he said.
