I asked the gender editor of The Times to walk us through the details.

I asked Jessica Bennett, The Times’s gender editor and author of the book “Feminist Fight Club,” to demystify some commonly misunderstood aspects of the pay gap. Here’s what she said.
The pay gap doesn’t account for women’s job choice.
The gap persists because women take time off to have children.
Bennett: Women’s compensation does often suffer when they return to work after having children. But even in their first year out of college, childless women earn 93 percent of what their male peers do, even if they had a similar G.P.A. and were working in the same fields.
Women get paid less because they have less education.
Bennett: Actually, more women than men have earned bachelor’s and master’s degrees since the 1980s. And for the past 10 or so years, they have also earned more doctoral degrees.
Women don’t get paid well because they don’t negotiate well.
O.K., but we’re on our way to closing the gap, right?
Bennett: If you consider the year 2059 soon, sure. That’s how long it will take in the United States, according to the Institute for Women’s Policy Research, at the current pace of change.
That’s how much the pay gap costs American women each year, according to the National Women’s Law Center, which based the figure on the difference between women’s and men’s median annual earnings for full-time, year-round workers. Over the course of a 40-year career, that amounts to $403,440.
That’s the number of Americans who are unaware of the wage gap, according to research by LeanIn.org. Congrats! You’re no longer one of them.
A decade ago, in January 2009, President Barack Obama signed his first bill into law: the Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act. It was named after an Alabama woman who at the end of a 19-year career at Goodyear discovered she had been paid less than her male peers. She sued and the case reached the Supreme Court, which ruled in favor of Goodyear — stating that Ms. Ledbetter should have filed her suit within 180 days of the first unequal paycheck she received.
The Fair Pay Act corrected that time limit so that each discriminatory paycheck, rather than just the first one, resets the 180-day limit to file a claim.
