Rabbi Yisroel Goldstein was shot in the hand during the attack on a synagogue in Poway, Calif., on Sunday. A congregant, Lori Gilbert Kaye, died during the shooting.
I walk two, three footsteps when I hear a loud bang. I thought Lori may have fell or the table tipped over in the lobby right here. I turn around and I see a sight that I — indescribable. Here is a young man standing with a rifle, pointing right at me, and I look at him. He had sunglasses on. I couldn’t see his eyes. I couldn’t see his soul. And I see Lori laying on the floor unconscious, and her dear husband, Dr. Howard Kaye, who’s like a brother to me, is trying to resuscitate her and he faints and he’s laying there on the floor next to his wife. And then their daughter, Hannah, comes out screaming, ‘Daddy and Mommy, what’s going —’ This is the most heart wrenching sight I could have seen. This horrific, terrible event that has occurred here, in my own interpretation, Lori took the bullet for all of us. She died to protect all of us.
POWAY, Calif. — The rabbi had just finished comforting a congregant as she prepared to say the traditional prayer for the dead in honor of her mother when a loud crack rang out in his synagogue.
It was about halfway through the Sabbath service on Saturday when a gunman turned what was supposed to be a time of solace into a day of horror. The rabbi, Yisroel Goldstein, turned quickly to see the body of the woman, Lori Gilbert Kaye, 60, slumped on the floor. He began to rush toward her when he caught sight of several small children watching as the gunman unleashed the attack on Chabad of Poway.
As Rabbi Goldstein ran out with the children, Ms. Kaye’s husband, a physician, ran in to help. But the second he recognized it was his wife on the ground, he fainted. Their only daughter stood a few feet away sobbing in shock, Rabbi Goldstein said.
It was only a few months ago, after another hate-fueled attack on a synagogue in Pittsburgh that Rabbi Goldstein completed training for a situation just like this. But it seemed impossible to imagine it would ever happen to his own congregation, he said.
Now Rabbi Goldstein and leaders like him in synagogues and other houses of worship are confronting their new reality. Just like school principals across the country, religious leaders now must take measures to prepare for the horrors of mass shootings. As recent attacks have shown, prayer services are increasingly vulnerable.
The shooting in Poway, about 25 miles north of San Diego, coincides with a significant spike in hate crimes, including acts of anti-Semitism. The gunman, whom police identified as John Earnest, 19, wrote a manifesto echoing the same kind of white supremacist views as the shooters in the attacks in the synagogue in Pittsburgh and on mosques in Christchurch, New Zealand. The latest attack came one week after mass bombings at churches and hotels in Sri Lanka left hundreds dead.
On Sunday, Mr. Earnest was booked on one charge of murder — Ms. Kaye was killed in the attack — and three charges of attempted murder.
Jewish institutions have invested much more significantly in security in the last few years, using private armed security guards, cameras, volunteer patrols and other measures, said Jerry Silverman, the president of the Jewish Federations of North America.
As hate-filled screeds spewing white nationalist conspiracy theories have ricocheted around the internet, hate crimes have increased in the past few years, according to the F.B.I. And all over the country and the world, houses of worship have tightened security in response to terrorist attacks.
African-American churches have long had to consider the probability of security threats, but recent events are showing many white congregations that their past sense of safety is false, said the Rev. Ronell Howard, pastor of Christ United Methodist Church of Piscataway, N.J.
“When I tell my Caucasian colleagues black churches have always had security as long as I can remember, they are always flabbergasted,” Ms. Howard, 50, said.
Rabbi Goldstein said that his congregation had never hired armed security guards, only because it could not afford to do so, and that the government should step in to pay for such security.
In 2017, the Jewish Federation of Greater Pittsburgh hired Brad Orsini, a retired F.B.I. agent, as a “community security director.” He immediately began training the staff and members of Jewish organizations all over the region. He had conducted well over 100 training sessions before last October, when 11 worshipers were shot and killed at the Tree of Life synagogue.
“Its very sad isn’t it? We have to train congregants to be safe so they can pray,” Mr. Orsini said on Sunday on the way back from a training session at a Pittsburgh synagogue, which had been attended by over 200 people.
The protocol he teaches has not changed — how to be aware of signs of hate in your area, how to evacuate, where to hide if evacuation is not possible, how to fight if there are no hiding places and, ultimately, how to treat the wounded.
What has changed, he said, is the interest.
“We now have 100 percent buy-in,” he said, which goes beyond the Jewish community, with requests coming in from organizations of different faiths for him to come in and discuss a plan for security.
A New York Times analysis identified more than 350 white extremist attacks in Europe, North America and Australia since 2011. Perpetrators of the deadliest attacks engaged with extremist content online.
At the Islamic Center of Fredericksburg, Va., parents have started to take turns sitting in their cars in the parking lot to keep watch after dropping their kids off for Sunday school.
Sara Shanab, 23, whose family goes to the mosque, said she feels more anxiety as the presidential election season draws near. Her community has experienced harassment before, but fear was heightened after the shootings in New Zealand last month, when a gunman killed 50 people at two mosques.
Russell Moore, the president of the Ethics and Religious Liberty Commission of the Southern Baptist Convention, said active shooter drills had become more common for church staff and security teams. His church in Nashville on Sunday morning included a lament for how many shootings and acts of violence in places of worship there have been in recent months.
The sense of fear and need for increased security is being felt well beyond the United States.
The Sri Lankan government has said the church bombings may have been in retaliation for the mosque shootings in New Zealand. And the day after the Christchurch terror attack, Shabbat services at synagogues across the country were canceled on the advice of the police. While New Zealand police are no longer providing round-the-clock armed guard at mosques, as they did immediately after the shooting, the mosques that were attacked still have protection.
Barry Werber, who survived the Tree of Life shooting, said he could hardly believe that any service would meet without security. As sad as it makes him, meeting without armed security is now simply shortsighted, he said.
Since the October attack, two of the congregations that had met at Tree of Life have been meeting in chapels at a synagogue nearby — and armed security guards now greet people at the doors.
“How do you not provide that?” asked Aaron Bisno, the rabbi of the host synagogue. This heightened security protocol does comes with a steep price. Two security guards for 13 hours costs more than $1,000 a day, Rabbi Bisno said, a cost prohibitive for many congregations, especially smaller ones. That is particularly demanding these days, when memberships at churches and synagogues nationwide are dwindling in numbers and resources.
Since the Pittsburgh attack in October, the Jewish Community Relations Council of New York has conducted over 200 security assessments of synagogues by request and has received inquires from additional synagogues since Saturday.
Dozens of synagogues in the city now employ armed security guards, while others which cannot afford to hire armed security have created plans involving blockading attackers from entering synagogue doors and strategies for evacuation in case of an active shooter, according to David Pollock, director of public policy and security at the council.
