For a story in T’s Culture issue, Carol Lim and Humberto Leon invited 25 American (or working-in-America) guests to a series of imaginary dinner parties. We asked them to contemplate the country now, and in the future.
On a snowy morning in early February, the designers Carol Lim and Humberto Leon, of Kenzo and Opening Ceremony, were conjuring up a dinner party of sorts. For T’s 2019 Culture issue, themed around America in 2024, they had invited 25 American (or working-in-America) artists, writers, actors, chefs and others to join them, over the course of two days, at a studio on the Far West Side of Manhattan for an imagined feast that would be the subject of a series of photo shoots. The images, creative directed by Lim and Leon, appear in the magazine alongside Mona Mansour’s original play “Leave the Car,” which they helped inspire.
In America, the year 2024 is linked, inextricably, to politics, but for Lim and Leon, the shoot was as much about the personal. “Growing up in America, fitting in was really something we strived for,” said Leon, whose parents are Peruvian and Chinese. “Our idea of the future is the opposite of that: embracing everything that makes you different, everything that your family came from, going back to the roots of your heritage and recognizing that that’s what makes you American.” When asked about the future, the actor Ari’el Stachel replied, “I feel compelled to say something optimistic, but I’m not convinced that I’m optimistic.” Others were more hopeful: “As long as the planet’s here, we will still fall in love, have babies, make art in 2024,” said the poet Jericho Brown. “We can be sure of that.” Below, the participants share their thoughts on America — past, present and future.
In 2016, my assistants and I would be in the studio laughing at the circus of the Republican primary, and we’d be like, “Yeah, ha ha, Trump, there’s no way.” And I kept saying, “Can this election just be over? Let’s move on already!”  So I have no idea. I don’t even want to try and make a prediction.
Describe your America.
My America is both familiar and disorienting. I’m first generation, my parents were both born in Jamaica, and I was born here and raised by Mom and Grandmother. So this is the only country that I know very well, and the only one that I’m a citizen of, but it has also always been slightly foreign, too. That’s a common facet of the American experience — it is a strange and new place that is also the place that you know.
What will America look like in 2024?
Because I believe in black people and because I know the history of black people in this nation, I have no choice but to also believe in resilience. I don’t think that we should have to endure the worst conditions, but even under the worst conditions, people are capable of thriving in ways that you would not expect. As long as the planet’s here, we will still fall in love, have babies, make art in 2024. We can be sure of that.
I’m on the more hopeful side, because there’s really no other outlook. Change is born out of a desire to make things better, to break through, to bring new leaders to the forefront. The traditional model we’ve been fed about who gets to have power and who gets to write legislation — it’s time to break that apart.
It’s only very recently that I’ve begin thinking about America being my America. I’ve been thinking about what America means to me as an African-American woman with roots that go back, probably, to the first 16 slaves that arrived in Jamestown. It’s easy for people not to think of black Americans being interwoven in the shaping of this country. I feel compelled to reclaim that narrative, based on my own needs and on being a mother and wanting to explain to my children how they fit into the wicked puzzle that is our country.
Right now, we remain so imprisoned by labels that have been imposed on us by a racist, sexist, misogynist culture. It would be lovely to see us being more fluid. I imagine we’ll get to a point where we’re all just “they.” 2024 is only five years away, but it’s not too much to expect that there will be some sort of revolution. I don’t mean people will take up arms, but a philosophical revolution in which we lean into compassion and empathy.
I have a show up at the Andy Warhol Museum, and we’ve made sure to have events geared toward black communities that have not always felt welcome. We hosted a conversation called “Shop Talk” where we talked about black male identity and queerness in barbershops. After, I had a conversation with one of the security guards, and he said it’s the first time he’s ever seen someone who looked like him show in the museum. So I’m hopeful.
I would hate to find us still fighting for the same things and still talking about diversity and representation in 2024. In my own work, we want to normalize women of color in leadership positions. It’s beyond “let us have a seat at the table.” I think we can celebrate being in America and hold it accountable, not live in it blindly. But I feel like there’s still so much internal work to be done in certain communities to get to that point.
I’m half Japanese and half white, and in Japan, I struggled with being different. Moving to New York made it O.K. for me to be different out of the gate. I came out within a month of moving here. Since then, it floats in and out. Sometimes America feels inclusive, and sometimes — especially in the last two years — I feel like an outsider.
I think a lot about how I’m stuck here and my parents and grandparents are in Korea — we can’t really hold hands, smell each other, share recipes. In Korea, on the eve of the anniversary of whoever has died in your family, there’s a little ceremony. I went back for my great-grandmother’s last year and learned to make a couple of dishes from my mother. It was fig season, so we harvested a ton of figs in my aunt’s backyard and made jam.
What will America be like 2024?
A.O.C. will be old enough to be president then, right? As someone at the tail end of Gen X, I feel inspired by the millennial generation. There are things that frustrate me about them as an employer, but I’m so impressed with their “we’re not going to take it” attitude.
I think in part because of the Food Network, there’s a bit more awareness of different cultures throughout America.  The grocery stores have changed, too — now you can buy kimchi, Vietnamese chili paste, different grades of tofu. Hopefully that will stick.
What will America be like in 2024?
In five or 10 years, people are going to be a mix of so many different cultures. The more you realize you have a different experience from the person next to you who looks like you, the more you’re forced to have a conversation.
I would love to see anywhere from three to nine Asian-American movie stars as opposed to the very limited number we have now. I’m going to try to make some myself, and I’d like to see some more be made.
A few years ago, I started to feel that portrayals of Asians in television, film and all fields was starting to expand. I kept telling my friends, “This is our time! It’s coming!” But with that, there’s going to be pushback. The status quo, the patriarchy, feels like somebody is coming to take something away from them. I wish it could feel like there’s enough to go around.
It’s a place that I’m simultaneously very much a part of and not a part of. I grew up in a town that was 95 percent white, and I’m half Korean and half Caucasian, so it felt a lot easier to identify with my American half. After my mom passed away, I found myself chasing after that heritage and sad that I’d rejected it. I’ve become really involved with Korean cooking as a way of remembering her. I started making my own kimchi, and I make kimchi stew a lot. It feels like a therapeutic process.
I grew up in a society where it really mattered who you were and what your parents did and how much money you had. I always felt a little alienated, and as soon as I had the ability to formulate thoughts, I knew that I would leave. I left Egypt when I was 18 and moved here by myself. In America I felt I could just be whoever I wanted to be — make up a career, make up a life for myself. I learned to cook out of homesickness and wanting to create a space for people to congregate. When I first moved, I would make baklava almost every week. Making the dough is kind of a long, annoying process, but it was meditative and I liked that it was tedious.
As far as I can tell, the self-identified left in the U.S. continue to define themselves in reaction to, rather than constructing the criteria for, a more humane present and less gruesome future. The now all-pervasive milieu of “woke advertising” is a prime example of how superficially checking the boxes of diversity and visibility are totally compatible with exploitation and capitalism. It sells you the lie of identification; we should instead be searching for how to develop solidarity.
I feel compelled to say something optimistic, but I’m not convinced that I’m optimistic. I think history continues to repeat itself. What I can focus on is the powerful effects of what representation in the arts can do. At the bare minimum, there will be a lot more marginalized people who feel like their voices might mean something.
I’ve never really thought about America being mine. It’s been difficult finding a voice. Growing up, I was told not to talk about being an immigrant, to learn how to pronounce words so it didn’t sound like I had an accent. My mom, who’s Colombian, would pack these amazing school lunches for me, and I would always get really anxious. Now, I wish my accent hadn’t been removed, and that I hadn’t been ashamed of not saying my “s’s” right. When you’re little and you want to fit in, you don’t understand that there are so many other factors acting against you.
I think we’re becoming more aware of how this “me, me, me” culture is continuing the destruction of the planet. This subtle movement is going to grow and one day we’ll realize that the tide has turned and instead of just barreling toward the iceberg, slowly, we’re turning and we’re just going to miss it.
By 2024, I hope there has been or we’re on our way to having a truth commission about Hurricane Maria. There is an urgent need to put on the table what happened and the racist treatment of the island.
I’d like to see a more generous policy for the border. Rather than asking, “Why are you in my country?” let’s try to understand what skills and experience people have to offer, and what they can teach.
I’m from Uruguay, but I don’t really cook Uruguayan food. For me, it’s more important to find a universal taste. It’s like a slice of pizza — you get a good slice of pizza and it doesn’t matter where you come from, who you are or your social status. A good slice of pizza just tears you apart.
My America is a recent phenomenon. In the past two years, I became a citizen. Before that, I was on visas and then I was in the process of residency with a green card. My citizenship came just in time, because it happened as the current president got elected. It was quite a scary time.
Interviews for this article have been condensed and edited for clarity.
