Biden Has a Long Record. Will This Help or Hurt Him?
Joseph R. Biden Jr. was a two-term vice president and spent 36 years as a senator. But his front-runner status in the Democratic primary will be tested by the party’s desire for generational change.
A former vice president known for — “My love affair with Amtrak.” “Back on Amtrak” — and his famous friend. “This also gives the internet one last chance to talk about our bromance.” Joe Biden is running for president. “Today, I am announcing my candidacy for president of the United States. He’s tried it before. “And with the grace of God and the support of the American people, I mean to be that kind of president.” Twice. “This is not about experience. It’s not about change. It’s about action.” So, why does he think the third time’s a charm? Biden may be betting that in this politically tumultuous time, voters are looking for a familiar face. He arrived in Washington before C-Span existed and before these members of Congress were born. His credentials are unmatched in the Democratic Party. He served two terms as vice president, 36 years in the Senate and has chaired powerful congressional committees. And he’s earned himself a few nicknames along the way. “Working-Class Joe.” “Working-Class Joe Biden.” “Old Uncle Joe Biden.” “Crazy Uncle Joe Biden, just being Biden.” So, what are Biden’s priorities? He’s a moderate Democrat and is likely to focus on: expanding health care, investing in education and rebuilding relationships with allies. “The America I see does not wish to turn our back on the world or our allies. We will be back.” But his decadeslong record comes with some baggage, including his support for the Iraq war. “President Bush is right to be concerned about Saddam Hussein’s relentless pursuit of weapons of mass destruction.” Tough anti-crime policies. “First, we have to join together to ensure that drug dealers are punished swiftly, surely and severely.” And his role in the Anita Hill hearing. “It is appropriate to ask Professor Hill anything any member wishes to ask her to plumb the depths of her credibility.” More recently, several women have come forward saying they were uncomfortable with the way Biden touched them.  Biden responded on Twitter. “The boundaries of protected personal space have been reset and I get it. I will be more mindful and respectful of people’s personal space. So, how has Biden taken on President Trump? They’ve had their share of fighting words.  Trump shot back on Twitter, and said Biden “would go down fast and hard, crying all the way.” Biden later said he regretted his comments. So, what are Biden’s odds? He entered the race as an instant front-runner and he’s already leading in early polls. But as a white man in his late 70s, Biden’s test will be whether his popularity can outweigh the party’s thirst for generational change.
Former Vice President Joseph R. Biden Jr. announced Thursday that he would seek the Democratic nomination to challenge President Trump in 2020, casting the election as a national emergency and asking Democrats to put the task of defeating Mr. Trump above all their other ambitions.
In a three-and-a-half minute video that focused on excoriating Mr. Trump, Mr. Biden presented himself as a steely leader for a country wracked by political conflict. Unlike the wide field of Democrats competing for the affections of the left, Mr. Biden avoided almost any talk of policy or ideology, signaling that he believes voters will embrace him as a figure of stability and maturity even in a partisan primary election.
In doing so, Mr. Biden, 76, is making a bet of sorts that the Democratic Party’s leftward shift in recent years has been greatly overstated, and that the moral clarity of his rhetoric and his seeming strength as a general election candidate will overpower other considerations for Democratic voters who tend to prize youth, diversity and unapologetic liberalism.
Mr. Biden elaborated on his opening argument at a fund-raising event in Philadelphia on Thursday evening, again decrying Mr. Trump’s response to the Charlottesville march. He rebuked what he described as Mr. Trump’s “embrace of dictators and oligarchs” and “the onslaught and constant attack on the courts, the constant attack on the press, the constant attack on even the Congress,” according to a recording of his remarks.
Mr. Trump did not directly address Mr. Biden’s video assailing his comments about Charlottesville, responding instead with personal taunts, calling Mr. Biden “Sleepy Joe” on Twitter and “not the brightest light bulb” on Fox News.
Mr. Biden enters the Democratic race as something of a front-runner, albeit one beset by challenges from all flanks and looming questions about his long political record. Two of Mr. Biden’s populist rivals, Senators Bernie Sanders of Vermont and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts, were already jabbing at his relationships with moneyed interests on Thursday. And Mr. Biden’s allies believe he must soon explain to voters his evolution on a range of issues, including elemental ones like criminal justice, abortion rights and the Iraq war.
In a sign he may recognize the urgency of that task, Mr. Biden recently spoke privately with Anita Hill, who in 1991 was questioned harshly by a Senate committee led by Mr. Biden after she accused Clarence Thomas, now a Supreme Court justice, of sexual harassment. Mr. Biden expressed regret, according to an aide, but in an interview Ms. Hill said she left the conversation feeling deeply unsatisfied and did not describe Mr. Biden as having apologized.
Mr. Biden’s long-awaited entry effectively completes the list of Democratic candidates, a cast of 20 characters that is the most diverse presidential field ever. Atop it, for now, are two white men in their eighth decades of life — Mr. Biden and Mr. Sanders.
Mr. Biden’s position as the leading Democratic candidate is an unfamiliar one for him. His two previous presidential bids, in 1988 and 2008, failed to catch on. Though he campaigned twice as former President Barack Obama’s running mate, Mr. Biden has never been the starring actor in a major political production of his own inception.
The overarching question of Mr. Biden’s campaign is whether he can fill that role with sufficient competence and imagination to both dispel Democratic concerns about his personal discipline and inspire younger voters for whom he is a relatively distant figure.
He gave a brief preview on Thursday evening of how he might talk about issues besides Mr. Trump, telling the fund-raising gathering that he would focus on “economic dignity” as an organizing concept.
“My North Star of what we’re going to talk about, in terms of the economy, is restoring the middle class, but looking at dignity, not just the G.D.P.,” Mr. Biden said.
Mr. Biden is seen by most Democratic voters as a sympathetic figure, a trustee of Mr. Obama’s legacy whose life has been touched repeatedly by grievous tragedy. He has spoken frequently about the death of his first wife, Neilia, and his infant daughter in a 1972 car crash; the death of his son, Beau, in 2015 became an occasion of national mourning.
But Mr. Biden differs in profound ways, in his identity and political orientation, from the rising generation of voters and activists that has increasingly come to define the Democratic Party.
Mr. Biden is a white man who became a senator during Richard Nixon’s presidency, in a party seen as prizing youth and diversity. He is a centrist and a determined champion of bipartisanship, vying to lead a coalition that views the Republican Party as irretrievably malignant. And he plans to finance his campaign chiefly through large contributions from traditional party bankrollers, in an age of grass-roots hostility to corporations and the very wealthy.
Mr. Biden has appeared alternately eager to campaign as Mr. Obama’s natural heir, and also wary of subsuming his candidacy entirely in nostalgia for an earlier administration. He did not mention Mr. Obama in his announcement video, and he told reporters, in a brief exchange Thursday at the Wilmington, Del., Amtrak station that bears his name, that he did not want Mr. Obama’s backing at the outset.
“I asked President Obama not to endorse and whoever wins this nomination should win it on their own merits,” Mr. Biden said.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Obama issued a statement on Thursday praising Mr. Biden warmly but not endorsing him, and over the last year Mr. Obama has quietly encouraged a range of other candidates to pursue the presidency.
The dividing line in Democratic politics around Mr. Biden’s candidacy was immediately apparent on Thursday morning. He was instantly endorsed by a number of prominent moderates, including Senators Bob Casey of Pennsylvania and Doug Jones of Alabama, and the International Association of Firefighters is expected to back him early next week. In the crucial early state of New Hampshire, a popular former governor, John Lynch, agreed to help lead Mr. Biden’s campaign.
At the same time, a number of vocal liberal activists and advocacy groups offered blunt criticism of Mr. Biden. One of the more influential groups on the insurgent left, Justice Democrats, issued a scathing statement rejecting Mr. Biden as an option in the race and describing him as a symbol of the Democratic establishment that was unable to stop Mr. Trump in 2016.
“The old guard of the Democratic Party failed to stop Trump, and they can’t be counted on to lead the fight against his divide-and-conquer politics today,” said Alexandra Rojas, the group’s executive director.
Mr. Biden is poised to embark on an ambitious and highly visible campaign schedule, starting with a Friday appearance on ABC’s “The View,” in his first television interview as a candidate. He plans to visit a Pittsburgh union hall on Monday to make remarks on the economy, before embarking on a multiweek tour of the early primary states and California, culminating in a May 18 speech in Philadelphia about “unifying America,” his campaign said.
Facing intensifying scrutiny of his long record, Mr. Biden has yet to allay concerns about the most contentious aspects of his career. In recent months, he expressed remorse — without quite apologizing — for having supported draconian tough-on-crime measures in the 1980s and 1990s, and said he wished the Hill-Thomas hearings before the Senate Judiciary Committee had gone differently.
But Ms. Hill told The Times on Thursday that she could not support Mr. Biden, and told a reporter that he should “give an apology to the other women and to the American public” because of the wide-reaching social impact of the hearings. Mr. Biden is certain to have to address the issue again.
Marc Morial, the president of the National Urban League, said Mr. Biden would bring a unique set of political strengths to the race, but would also need to address aspects of his record that make progressives uneasy.
Mr. Biden’s competitors have already had months to find their footing in the race. The field includes muscular fund-raisers like Mr. Sanders, Senator Kamala Harris of California and former Representative Beto O’Rourke of Texas; intriguing underdogs, like Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.; and policy-minded liberals like Ms. Warren and Senator Cory Booker of New Jersey, who have helped frame the race as a contest of ideas.
Mr. Biden’s rivals largely avoided criticizing him on Thursday, but Ms. Warren and Mr. Sanders — the two most aggressive populists in the race — were exceptions. In an email to supporters, Mr. Sanders’s campaign manager, Faiz Shakir, chided Mr. Biden for ending the day “in the home of a corporate lobbyist,” an allusion to Mr. Biden’s fund-raiser in Philadelphia with a Comcast executive.
And addressing reporters in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, Ms. Warren described Mr. Biden as having been “on the side of credit card companies” during a landmark battle over bankruptcy legislation last decade, in which Ms. Warren was on the opposing side.
That line of attack is likely to be a dangerous one for Mr. Biden, as the race proceeds. And his private endeavors could also become political targets. Mr. Biden has earned millions of dollars through paid speeches and book deals since leaving office, and has created a network of nonprofits and academic centers that employ many of his trusted aides. He intends to shut down the most prominent of those groups, the Biden Foundation.
Rival Democrats have taken encouragement from several unsteady moments in the Biden camp, including his halting response this month to a wave of stories about his physical behavior with women. And his advisers repeatedly explored and then disavowed some offbeat or daring plans, including announcing a running mate early in his campaign.
Mr. Biden’s candidacy is a bet, above all, that none of that will matter in comparison to voters’ alarm at the possibility of Mr. Trump’s re-election.
There are few modern examples of a man of Mr. Biden’s age assuming the leadership of a Western democratic power. The precedents that exist have tended to arise from moments of military conflict or social turbulence: Georges Clemenceau becoming France’s premier during World War I at the age of 76, or Winston Churchill returning as prime minister in the 1950s, also at 76.
Mr. Biden would be 78 on Inauguration Day in 2021, and it remains to be seen whether voters will view him as a similar kind of political savior, or the times as equally dire.