Reaching Nablus, in the West Bank, from Jordan takes planning, and patience.
There is the circuitous drive to the closest border checkpoint. There are the notoriously long lines and waits to make the crossing. But if you’re fortunate, as was the British-Palestinian writer Isabella Hammad, you may have as your guide a “force of nature” grandmother, who comes prepared with a detailed itinerary and a game plan.
The book, a sweeping historical novel that opens in the waning days of the Ottoman Empire, comes out on Tuesday from Grove Press. It follows a Palestinian from Nablus, Midhat Kamal, from roughly 1914 to the mid-1930s, as the region is poised to change hands from Ottoman to British control. To avoid being forced to fight in World War I, Midhat goes to Montpellier to study medicine, moves to Paris and finally returns to Palestine after a few years. The character is based on Hammad’s great-grandfather, whose nickname in Nablus, “al-Barisi,” means “the Parisian” in Arabic.
Hammad joins a group of contemporary Palestinian authors, virtually all of them female, who write in English, including Hala Alyan, Etaf Rum, Randa Jarrar, Susan Abulhawa and Selma Dabbagh. Their books share common themes: Many of the stories unfold both in the Middle East and the West, and explore how displacement, nostalgia and loss are refracted across generations of families.
But “The Parisian” is among the first to be set in the era before the founding of Israel: before the 1967 war that led to occupation and the displacement of scores of families, before the uprisings known as the intifadas, before the Palestinian-Israeli conflict became a global political flash point.
While the timeline of Midhat’s life offered a natural framing for the book, Hammad was also interested in exploring a point of view that showed “the complexity of Palestinian life” and avoided reductive characterizations of Palestinians as either militants or victims.
Born to a British-Irish mother and a Palestinian father, Hammad first had the idea to write about Midhat when she was a teenager.
Literature offered an alternative way to understand history. “We didn’t learn about empire in school — I came to understand the British Empire through books,” she said, citing Said as an influence along with Chinua Achebe, Virginia Woolf, the Black Mountain poets and Scottish myth.
She graduated with a literature degree from Oxford in 2012, then spent months in the Middle East doing research, interviewing Palestinians, historians, architects and geographers.
“I basically said to anyone, If you have a grandparent with a good memory, I’d like to talk with them,” Hammad said. She spent time with extended family members and others — her grandmother came prepared with a Filofax of names — including people with “very, very vivid memories” who remembered her great-grandfather, which helped stoke her imagination and evoke the mood of the city at that time. Back in Britain, Hammad supplemented those accounts with archival research and documents from British soldiers in the Middle East, including a guidebook “about Jews and Palestinians, their inclinations, their temperament, their history,” she said.
“The Parisian” calls to mind a 19th-century novel. Midhat enjoys taking walks around Paris and returns to Palestine with a dapper wardrobe that includes a cane. There is a purloined letter and a halted romance. And despite the tumult going on around him, Midhat is more preoccupied by his inner life than the surrounding political activity.
His personal turmoil stems from conflicting identities (“He was two men,” Hammad writes), and from believing he belongs equally in Palestine and Europe yet feeling like an outsider in both places.
