A new drama series tells the true story of a woman who defied norms in 19th-century England. And a documentary about Baltimore is on PBS.
THE NEIGHBORHOOD 8 p.m. on CBS. The first season of this family sitcom about black and white neighbors in a gentrifying Los Angeles neighborhood comes to a close. Dave (Max Greenfield) can’t stop smiling when Calvin (Cedric the Entertainer) invites him golfing, and Gemma (Beth Behrs) comes up with a plan to impress Grover (Hank Greenspan) after he tells her he’s had enough of boring “mom stuff.” The show was renewed for a second season, and when Greenfield found out, the news reduced him to tears (according to his 10-year-old daughter, in a recent interview in The Times).
UNDER THE WIRE (2018) 9 p.m. on Starz. Last fall, the war correspondent Marie Colvin became the subject of two films that opened at roughly the same time: “A Private War,” a biographical drama starring Rosamund Pike in the leading role, and this chilling documentary by Chris Martin. In 2012, Colvin illegally crossed the border into Syria with the photographer Paul Conroy. Weeks later, she and another reporter were killed in a rocket attack. Here, Conroy revisits those memories with the urge to share Colvin’s story — and the stories of the civilians she was covering.
INDEPENDENT LENS: CHARM CITY (2018) 10 p.m. on PBS (check local listings). The director Marilyn Ness shot this documentary about Baltimore (Charm City is one of its nicknames) over three years. In that time, more than 1,000 people were reportedly killed in the city. That rampant violence takes center stage here, as do the people who tirelessly work to stop it. Told in cinéma vérité style, the movie profiles a handful of characters — police officers, community organizers and a young councilman — who cling to hope when the odds seem stacked against them.
PINKY MALINKY Stream on Netflix. The first season of this odd yet entertaining animated series continues. It follows a cheery anthropomorphic hot dog (voiced by Lucas Grabeel) and his human friends in the fictional town of Sackenhack.