WASHINGTON — A panel of three federal judges ruled on Thursday that 34 congressional and state legislative districts in Michigan are extreme partisan gerrymanders and unconstitutional. The judges ordered state lawmakers to redraw maps in time for elections in 2020.
The panel wrote that it was joining “the growing chorus of federal courts” that have held that drawing districts to unfairly favor the party in power is unconstitutional. The judges said the maps violated Democratic voters’ constitutional rights.
But the impact of the ruling ultimately will turn on an opinion by the Supreme Court, which is weighing decisions in two other partisan gerrymander cases involving congressional districts in North Carolina and Maryland. The justices’ decision in those cases, expected by the end of June, could reinforce the Michigan ruling, force alterations to it, or even overrule it entirely.
The 146-page Michigan opinion, joined by two judges named to the bench by President Bill Clinton and one named by President George Bush, made a pointed and passionate argument to the justices for action to outlaw at least some partisan gerrymanders.
During arguments in the Supreme Court cases last month, some justices questioned whether it was possible to draw a bright line between an acceptable political map and one that is too partisan, and others wondered aloud whether a growing public outcry against partisan maps might solve the problem without judicial intervention.
But in the Michigan ruling, the three judges said emphatically that inaction was not an option.
Michigan is frequently a battleground state in statewide and national elections, divided about evenly between the two major parties. The state’s Republican-dominated Legislature controlled redistricting after population data from the 2010 census became available.
Perhaps more strikingly, the judges ruled that all 34 maps violated Democratic voters’ First Amendment right to freedom of association and effectively punished them for their political views by placing them in districts where their votes were worthless. Plaintiffs in the North Carolina gerrymander case made the same argument to the Supreme Court in March.
In each of the contested districts, the judges wrote, the plaintiffs — the League of Women Voters, representing individual Michigan citizens — proved that the legislature had intended to silence Democratic voters, that the maps succeeded at that task, and that there was no other reasonable justification for the way the maps were drawn.
The judges rejected the contention by lawyers for the legislature that the maps simply adhered to state standards that lawmakers were required to follow when drawing political boundaries — that districts have nearly the same population, for example, and that the mapmakers try not to split counties and cities. “The evidence points only to one conclusion: partisan considerations played a central role in every aspect of the redistricting process,” the judges wrote.
In elections from 2012 through 2016, they noted, Michigan Republicans won nine of the state’s 14 House seats — 64 percent — despite failing to win more than 50.5 percent of the statewide vote in any of those years. And last year, when Democrats won nearly 56 percent of the vote and swept statewide offices, they still won only half the 14 House seats.
The legislators’ case was undermined early on by a string of emails unearthed during discovery that laid bare both their intentions and the political animus behind them. The emails boasted of packing “Dem garbage” into four districts in southeastern Michigan, leaving adjacent districts with secure Republican majorities. And the messages joked over how a narrow extension of one Democratic congressman’s district was “giving the finger” to its incumbent.
The judges appeared most swayed, however, by stacks of statistical evidence that the 34 House and legislative districts so profoundly benefited Republicans that there was no plausible explanation for their shapes beyond locking in a partisan advantage.
In one instance, Jowei Chen of the University of Michigan, a political-science professor and expert witness for the plaintiffs, produced 1,000 simulated political maps drawn randomly according to the state’s standards, and compared them to the maps drawn by Republicans.
“Not a single one of Dr. Chen’s simulated 1,000 plans created nine Republican congressional districts and five Democratic congressional districts,” the judges wrote. Nor did any of the 1,000 simulated maps drawn for State House and Senate districts give Republicans as many seats as they won in those chambers.
Similarly, the Republican-drawn map for the Fifth Congressional District, where one plaintiff in the case lives, packed the district with more Democratic voters than would be found in that plaintiff’s district in any of Dr. Chen’s simulated maps.