As neighboring states move to limit abortion access, Illinois is trying to protect it. We spent a day with three women at an abortion clinic there.
What did you do in the clinic?
What I did was counsel people who called, and then we would talk to these people on the phone. And we had to explain all that to them, that here was the state in Missouri, where you could not get an abortion, but here was the state of New York, where you could go by an airplane, you can go to a good clinic there with obstetricians, well-trained obstetricians. You can go there in the morning, and you could come back at night, just that kind of thing. People just didn’t know about that at all.
Vivian, what were some of the stories that they told you? You were talking to them a lot.
 And oh, I can’t go down to that line of people, because my sister’s down there protesting against abortion. You know? And believe me, this girl who said, oh, I couldn’t do that, is the girl who next week will be walking in that line. You just can’t imagine how it used to be. Until it hits you, it’s always, oh, you shouldn’t do that. But when it hits your family, all of a sudden you wake up, and you realize that sometimes there are no other answers.
That’s not going to solve your problems. How about it guys? 
Come on, guys, thou shalt not kill, you know that. I didn’t say that.
Today, the second half of our story on abortion in America, told through two states: Missouri, where it’s going away, and Illinois, where it’s increasingly protected.
You’re good people, but you’re doing a terrible thing. Come on, guys, don’t do this.
In the first few months of 2019, the fight over abortion has taken a new turn. The Supreme Court has changed, and now, red states that have long wanted to ban abortion are seeing an opening, one in their favor.
How about it, guys? It’s not too late as long as your baby’s heart’s beating. Happy Father’s Day, man, because you’ll always be his daddy.
We’re here to see Dr. King. Lynsea Garrison and Sabrina Tavernise.
Go in the door, all the way to the top stairs. Once you reach the top stairs, push the button on the wall.
Top stairs, O.K. Thank you so much.
In the last few months alone, four states have passed bans on abortion after six weeks. That’s before most women even know they’re pregnant. Thirteen states are following suit. Missouri is one of them.
 Give those babies up for adoption.
So Missourians are turning to Illinois because their own state has made it too hard.
“Daily” producer Lynsea Garrison and I went to one abortion clinic right across the state line in Illinois.
It’s called Hope Clinic for Women.
And we spent the day there, with three different patients who were getting abortions.
Hi. Good morning. How are you?
It’s Thursday, April 18.
[INAUDIBLE] I love you.
Chapter 3, “The Patients.” We get to the clinic in the morning.
Did you take a pregnancy at home or with a doctor?
All right, I got you in here for the 1st. And make sure you’re here right at 8:00, O.K. ?
It’s really busy.
It’s very busy. Yeah, it’s very busy.
O.K., that will be at 8:00 a.m.. So we need for you to shower, wear comfortable clothing, eat before you get here. Once you get here, you cannot consume anything other than water. If you want sedation, you must have a driver with you.  We have protesters that line our sidewalks. They are not allowed on our property. And then expect to be here for six to eight hours on the day of your appointment. All right, do you have any questions?
(ON PHONE) No, I do not.
All right, so then we will see you on Friday the 31st at 8:00 a.m.
(ON PHONE) Great. Thank you.
How many of those do you think are from women from Missouri?
Quite a bit are from Missouri. I would say about — just guessing — maybe, like, 60 percent to 70 percent are Missouri residents.
It’s always been majority Missouri, in my mind, ever since I’ve been here.
We walk to the back to see Dr. King, the head doctor.
This is our counseling station.
Someone has Tiffany’s chart.
And then we meet a patient named Tiffany.
Is my picture going to be in the paper or anything?
O.K., good, that’s all.
The counselor asks her if she’s sure.
I am — I am just 100 percent confident this is the right decision for me.
I’m glad. I’m glad. So this next part is just going over the consent forms. I’m going to play a recording that’s going to read through them with you. And if you could just go through and initial by everything and then print, sign and date when you’re done. If you have any questions, let me know.
Do you have any questions about any of that information?
No — I would like to smoke a cigarette before.
You can do that. When you leave my office, you can go smoke a cigarette. Just let the front desk know, so they’re not looking for you.
O.K., I’m good. O.K.
Let me go smoke a cigarette real quick. 
I can’t wait for this to be over.
— to a little bench outside the front doors of the clinic. It was quiet there.
It’s not too late to save this baby. This isn’t the answer.
Almost immediately, we’re spotted by a protester.
You know what? This isn’t it. This is first-degree murder, first-degree murder of a baby.
You know what? Yes, you do. You could put it up for adoption. It is killing. 
Well, you’re killing my spirit right now.
It’s killing a baby.
What did you think about that?
 [LAUGHS] I’m back.
Oh, that’s me, ladies. I gotta go.
She’s called pretty quickly.
You too, Tiffany.
We watch her walk away, her blanket draped across her shoulders.
When Tiffany found out she was pregnant, her first thought was maybe she could have a son. She already has a 14-year-old daughter. But she’d been addicted to opioids until recently, and she knew a pregnancy was just too much for her life right now. She had a hard time coming up with the money for the abortion, which came to around $660. She considered selling her most valuable possession on eBay, her Eagles football gear. But then she got a grant.
After Tiffany left, we sat in the waiting room and looked at all the women.
Should I read some of these?
Yeah, I feel like we should pick a few.
And then we spotted a guestbook with entries from patients who’d passed through.
I was wondering if it was her.
What’s up? Oh! Do you know her name? ‘Cause I have a couple people on here.
O.K., she might be on there.
O.K. She was just saying there’s a patient that is fine talking to you guys.
And then we meet Sam. She’s here with her mom.
Oh, this is Sam!
Well, this is Sam.
She’s small, in a baggy sweatshirt, with cropped blue hair.
How long have you been blue?
Well, it changes quite often. But I think this time, it’s probably been blue for a couple weeks, probably four or five weeks.
We walk with her down the hall to another small room, and we check the levels on our microphone.
And then we ask her about getting pregnant and having to tell her mom that her period was late.
another week passed. And she just woke me up one morning. And she’s like, here, I got you this — you know, I got you this pregnancy test. The best time to do it is right when you wake up. So here. Just do it right now. And I was like, O.K. And I did it. And within 30 seconds it came up positive. And I just cried. And she hugged me. And she was like, it’s O.K. We’ll take care of this. So I was very lucky I have her around for it.
Hi, Sam. I’m Dr. Vaughn. It’s nice to meet you.
And then the doctor and Sam’s mom come in.
And otherwise, Sam, it looks like you are really healthy and boring. Correct?
Yeah, no problems.
That is a good thing. It is good to be boring at the doctor’s office. All right, excellent.
Oh, yeah, you can be here. That’s fine.
O.K. So the first thing I’m going to give you is a copy of the consent form that you have already signed. Now, I am going to sign a copy. So then you are going to get to keep a copy that has my name and signature for your own records. O.K.?
All right. Water? So let me take your hand. This is the Mifepristone. So this one, you’re going to swallow for me, O.K.? O.K.
O.K. And then I’m giving you your antibiotics.
That’s the Mifepristone. This is your antibiotic pill. O.K.? That’s just to prevent infection. Swallow that one down.
Get it? O.K., that’s it. All right. Do you want any more?
All right. So we’re done with that. So you are done. So you have a follow-up appointment with us.
And just like that, it was over. She could go home.
I have a — a special one here. And like I was telling her, hey, we all make mistakes. And I told her not to let anyone judge her, make her own decisions. And whatever her decision was that she decided, I would be behind her 100 percent because I love her. And she’s my daughter. And whatever is best for her, I don’t think that this is something that people should do constantly, but I thank God that they made it available, that we could do this, and that this worked for her. And it was kind of hard walking up with people outside saying all their horrible things.
Has this brought you guys even closer together?
(CRYING) She’s always there for me, always.
— no matter what it is. And I love her.  But I don’t know if she could have been down here with me or not. But I couldn’t be that way for her.  She’s my kid. And I’ll be there for her. I think — and I think this has probably brought us a little closer. (WHISPERING) Now, the other one out there, her boyfriend, I’m not too happy with him. [LAUGHTER] But, you know, (NORMAL VOICE) I can deal with him too. Thanks, ladies. Y’all have a great day.
Sam told us she’d had mental health issues, and her boyfriend, who was 18, had had problems too. Before she came to Hope Clinic, she’d gone somewhere else for a free consultation. It was something called a crisis pregnancy center. They’re run by anti-abortion activists. And they told her that sometimes people just need a baby to get better themselves, to straighten out their lives. And Sam thought that was crazy.
— in the operating room with us that we just saw. [DOOR SQUEAKS] We’ll take a look and see if we’ve got everything set up in here.
So then, Dr. King shows us the room where the surgical abortions take place.
— sterilizing our instruments. Looks like Danielle is in here is setting up things, yeah, checking things, routine things, like checking in, making sure there’s oxygen in the oxygen tank. Hey, Pat. You can come in.
That’s when Nurse Pat walks in.
Pat’s very — Pat, you’re very good at verbal anesthesia.
Can I ask you the types of things you say?
Do you hold their hand?
No, I hold their hands. I hold their bodies. I tuck them in my arm and have them listen to my heart and then tell them, I’m your grandma. And they’re like, O.K. You know? Hi, my name’s Pat, and I’m here for you. I can hold your hand. I can hold you. I can do this. Or I can just take — you know, like this. Put your hand out.
And then Pat reaches out and wraps Lynsea in her arms for a demo.
Just — you’re doing great. You’re doing awesome. I’m so proud of you. O.K.? And then when I’m done, I go — [KISS] [LAUGHS] I just kiss them.
Aw, that’s so nice. That felt really good.
Oh, I think we know a Sabrina.
And then we meet another patient, Sabrina. That’s not her real name.
She should be out in the next, like, five minutes or so.
Are these helping your stomach?
Mm-hmm. I’m hungry.
Her appetite has been huge. So she ate several meals in preparation before the procedure.
I had Jack in the Box. I had that one little kid $2 cheeseburger meals from Jack in the Box. And then my Mama had made some tuna. I went and got some of that too. I ate all that before I came.
When she found out she was pregnant, she knew immediately what she didn’t want.
I don’t want no more kids right now.
Mm-hmm. I got one son. And I love him to death. He four. But I don’t want more kids. It just wasn’t the right time. So I feel like this was best. And I feel like it should be O.K. if that’s what you decide to do. Because when it all boils down, guess who gonna be stuck? You. Mm-hmm. The mother, it’s always the mother. The father gets an option. But I just — I didn’t want to do that this time. Mm-mm. So I decided to do this. It’s too much. Like, when I first had my son, I was not mentally prepared for that. I literally almost had a mental breakdown. My mom had to get my son for, like, a couple of weeks for me because it was just too much. People don’t think about that. Then they wonder why there be so many kids on the street or so much bad stuff happens, because people have all these kids that they never wanted to take care of or raise in the first place. This is about actually raising a person to be a decent person in this cruel world.  It’s just too hard. So I decided to do this. It’s my choice.
I am starving. I cannot wait to get up out of here to eat.
Shaman. He got a smart mouth. But he just so smart.  But I don’t think I need no more Shamans. [LAUGHS] Uh-huh, that’s enough. So that’s why I’m here right now. I couldn’t do that this time.
Sabrina’s a single mom. Her son’s father was never really in the picture. She works in a warehouse, shipping goods for online orders. She told us she wanted to get out of her town, get a better job. But she knew that having another kid would make that hard.
It’s been 46 years since Roe v. Wade made abortion legal in the United States.
But I was, like, you’re 12 years old.
It’s incredibly common.
You know, what are you going to do with a kid?
One in every four women gets one.
And I was terrified because I didn’t want to have a child with this man.
We decided that the best thing was not to have a baby right now.
But even if you get one, that doesn’t exactly mean you like it.
I went back and forth so much about it, even telling anyone.
Or you will support people who are fighting for it.
No, it’s complicated. I would never let him know I got an abortion.
As we drove around the state, that’s what we heard over and over again.
Welcome back to McDonald’s. What I can do for you?
People’s views, they’re not consistent.
Welcome back to McDonald’s. I’ll be with you in just one moment.
Can we ask you a question?
We’re reporters, and we’re doing a story about abortion.
Do you think people are more accepting of it or less accepting of it?
I personally think it’s murder. But it’s your decision. Enjoy the rest of your day, guys.
Thank you. Oh, thanks so much. So I go out there.
 It’s a baby. It’s a heartbeat, so — I mean, I’ll be honest with you. A long time ago, I had had an abortion. But I was going through a lot of hard, hard things.
Just because a woman gets an abortion doesn’t mean she’s going to vote for it. And it doesn’t mean her family will either.
Like, should it be made illegal? Like, do you think it should be?
I feel like it should be.  
Even though it helped you at a certain point in your life?
Yeah, because I don’t like the way I feel now, afterwards. Yeah. I mean, did it really help anything? And now I have to live with that for the rest of my life.
 I was like, wait, what?  And I feel like that’s the normal experience, is you have no idea.
I just don’t think people know until it’s themselves. Then it’s deeply personal.
This is why it’s so hard politically, and why abortion has remained vulnerable.
This is the kind of person that makes me more furious than anyone, to say, it’s O.K. for me, but it’s not O.K. for you.
I asked Vivian Zwick about the contradictions. She said it’s been that way ever since she started working on abortion rights back in the ‘60s.
I find that absolutely to be the most awful attitude. It’s just an awful attitude to say, it’s O.K. for me, but I’m not going to vote for you to have it. I can’t understand it. But that’s the way it is.
What do you think is going to happen, Vivian?
I’m afraid to say what I think is going to happen. I was really — I really thought we had it made.
I think eventually, we will lose abortion.
Is it surprising to you?
No, it is not surprising to me. I find — well, it would make me feel very, very much like I’d wasted an awful lot of time. What was I doing? I thought I was doing good.
A growing number of states are beginning to pass laws that would immediately ban abortion if Roe v. Wade is overturned.
Kentucky could become the first U.S. state without an abortion clinic in our modern era.
The Ohio governor signing today what critics condemn as the most restrictive abortion law in the country.
And in Mississippi, the governor signs a bill banning most abortions as soon as the baby’s heartbeat is detected.
— coverage, the Missouri House is passing along the bill that would ban almost all abortions in the state, should the U.S. Supreme Court overturn Roe v. Wade. 
Vivian thought that the future was looking more and more like the past. And she’s kind of right. States are passing laws that, until now, had never gotten traction. They were considered legal dead ends. They would end up in court, where they would die. But with the new Supreme Court, that math has changed. And maybe one of those cases would mean the death of Roe v. Wade. And if it’s overturned, and abortion is no longer nationally protected, the map looks something like this. In a third of the country, it’s legal. In a third of the country, it’s not. And the rest is up for grabs. Missouri would be a state without abortion. And in some ways, when you drive across Missouri today, that already feels true.
There’s obviously been a lot of hard work by a lot of people throughout the Denver metro area. It did create a significant amount of concern regarding a — what we believe is a credible threat.
On Wednesday, just days before the 20th anniversary of the Columbine shooting, a massive police hunt for a woman who officials say was on a, quote, “pilgrimage” to Columbine shut down hundreds of schools in the Denver area, affecting half a million students.
The search ended when the woman, 18-year-old Sol Pais, was found dead from what appeared to be a self-inflicted gunshot wound. She had allegedly made threats online and had traveled from her home in Miami to Denver, where she then purchased a pump-action shotgun with ammunition.
We’ve had plenty of staff that have been boots on the ground, searching different areas. Everything that I’ve heard in briefings does not indicate that she had any assistance or friends in the area, just a fascination with the Columbine area and the horrendous crime that went on there 20 years ago.
That’s it for The Daily. I’m Sabrina Tavernise. Tomorrow, my colleague Mike Schmidt will be hosting.
Four states have passed laws this year that effectively ban abortion after six weeks of pregnancy, and others, including Missouri, are expected to follow suit. Some Missourians are crossing the state line to Illinois, where abortion access is protected. We spent a day at a clinic in Illinois with three women who were getting abortions.
If you missed Part 1 of this series, listen here.
Sabrina Tavernise, a national correspondent for The New York Times.
Bans on abortion in the very early weeks of pregnancy — after a fetal heartbeat is detected — used to be rare. But in the past three months, four states have passed so-called heartbeat bills, and 11 others are considering them.
In 1973, the Supreme Court ruled — with little controversy — that women had a constitutional right to abortion. How did the decision give way to today’s deep political divide? Listen to a series from “The Daily” on Roe v. Wade.
“The Abortion Wars, Part 2: The Illinois Option” was hosted and reported by Sabrina Tavernise and Lynsea Garrison, produced by Lynsea Garrison, and edited by Wendy Dorr.
“The Daily” is made by Theo Balcomb, Andy Mills, Lisa Tobin, Rachel Quester, Lynsea Garrison, Annie Brown, Clare Toeniskoetter, Paige Cowett, Michael Simon Johnson, Brad Fisher, Larissa Anderson, Wendy Dorr, Chris Wood, Jessica Cheung, Alexandra Leigh Young, Jonathan Wolfe, Lisa Chow, Eric Krupke, Marc Georges and Luke Vander Ploeg. Our theme music is by Jim Brunberg and Ben Landsverk of Wonderly. Special thanks to Sam Dolnick, Mikayla Bouchard, Stella Tan, Julia Simon, Samantha Henig, Alison Dreith, Jen Girdish, Jesse Lawder and Samuel Lee.