Your Money|Notre-Dame Donation Backlash Raises Debate: What’s Worthy of Philanthropy?
But the outpouring met with resistance as critics wondered why tragedies like the incineration of the National Museum of Brazil in Rio de Janeiro in September did not receive the same degree of support. And it rekindled class resentment in a city already racked by the so-called Yellow Vest movement, a populist response to economic inequality in France that tapped into a rising global movement against the concentration of wealth.
Some criticism was aimed at donors for not paying their fair share in taxes and thus depriving the French government of the revenue to repair Notre-Dame itself. Others denounced the reputational boost bestowed on philanthropists at a time of national tragedy. And some attacked the premise of giving so much to a damaged cathedral when that money could better benefit social service organizations that could provide food, shelter or a better education to needy citizens.
But philanthropic experts and advisers said they were not shocked by what seemed like an ungrateful response.
Others took a less philosophical approach, saying that for society to be most effective, philanthropists need to work with government and the private sector, not alone or in opposition to them.
If such critical responses toward prominent donations becomes a trend, donors could be forced to rethink big gifts. Some are worried that could have a chilling effect on giving, while others hope it forces people to think differently about what their money supports.
Those who are worried about the backlash think anger over unequal distribution of wealth is bleeding into the wrong areas.
He said private philanthropic organizations like the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation supported ideas that had become part of the social fabric, like the 911 emergency system and the field of nurse practitioners. And the Libra Foundation, which is backed by a part of the Pritzker family, supplied $350,000 in grants to organizations addressing the needs of families being separated at the United States-Mexico border.
Mr. Buchanan said that to solve social problems, all three sectors of society — public, private and philanthropic — needed to do the jobs they were meant to do at a high level, not be sidetracked by a backlash.
Mr. Tedesco had a different concern: that already too much money earmarked for philanthropy was not being put to use.
But for those who would rather avoid backlash, anonymity is always an option. Caroline W. Hodkinson, director of philanthropic advisory at Bessemer Trust, said some of the firm’s wealthiest clients were opting to use limited liability companies to hold money that was earmarked for philanthropy but that could also be used for impact investing. The investment vehicles give donors greater flexibility over how the money is managed, but they also provide near-total anonymity.
“A private foundation is about the least private thing you can have,” she said. By meeting Internal Revenue Service reporting requirements, “you’re opening up your affairs to the world,” she said.
Anonymity on large gifts is also fairly easy to arrange. “It’s a business negotiation,” said Jared Feldman, who, as the partner in charge of the private client group at the accounting firm Anchin, has worked on four gifts of more than $100 million each.
But anonymity presents a problem because of its inherent lack of transparency.
“I’m concerned about the anonymity issue,” said Lawson Bader, chief executive of DonorsTrust, a donor-advised fund. Knowing who a benefactor is helps build trust, he said, whereas anonymity can hide potential conflicts. For instance, museums are re-examining gifts from the Sackler family, a prominent donor in the art world, after its involvement in the opioid crisis became known. Had the donations been made anonymously, they would not be under scrutiny now.
Some critics hope that the backlash goes beyond assessing the merits of certain donors and donations and instead forces a wholesale re-evaluation of philanthropy.
When philanthropists, particularly in the tech world, make sweeping pronouncements like Mark Zuckerberg’s $3 billion plan to cure all disease, Mr. Giridharadas said, society needs to tone down its adulation and be skeptical.
Mr. Giridharadas said he would like to see philanthropists make gifts instead to organizations that shake up the social order. “The kind of giving I advocate is ‘being a traitor to your class’ giving,” he said.
Unlike Mr. Giridharadas, who supports shaking up norms, Mr. Berggruen is focused on helping democracies work better by drawing on the best philanthropic traditions.
Aside from the backlash, the debate stirred by the donations to Notre-Dame has also raised hope.
