WASHINGTON — It was emailed to 388 administration officials every night as an attachment: a copy of President Trump’s private daily schedule, outlining his upcoming meetings and their locations, helping the White House staff plan around his day.
There are no more email attachments, according to two officials. Instead, the president’s daily private schedule is now shared on SharePoint, a Microsoft product that allows an administrator to monitor who has viewed the document. Based on how often people view the schedule, and when its contents become public, the White House has narrowed down its search for the schedule “leaker” to three potential culprits, a person familiar with the matter said.
But since the beginning of his presidency, Mr. Trump has been preoccupied with “leakers” he is convinced are embedded in the government and are part of the “deep state,” working either in intelligence agencies or on his own White House staff.
“Leakers are traitors and cowards, and we will find out who they are!” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter last May.
Since the release of the special counsel’s report, Mr. Trump has become fixated on a new group he considers disloyal: the former administration officials who took notes while working in the White House and shared them with investigators.
“Watch out for people that take so-called ‘notes,’ when the notes never existed until needed,” Mr. Trump wrote on Twitter.
Playing on his paranoia, White House officials have often tried to diminish each other in the president’s eyes by accusing each other, in front of him, of being “the biggest leaker” in the West Wing.
But the schedule has been its own, specific headache. Its bare-bones contents never revealed much about the internal workings of the White House, where meetings most often happen on the fly as Mr. Trump calls officials in to chat with him in the Oval Office or in his private dining room.
Meetings that were scheduled were usually outlined in general terms, like a “meeting with the chief of staff” in the Oval Office; a 30-minute “intelligence briefing” with John R. Bolton, the national security adviser; or a 45-minute “border meeting” with Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser.
Certain events were purposefully left out — meetings with the president’s lawyers, as well as personal meetings with his children or friends like Sean Hannity, the Fox News host, who might come to the White House for a visit, according to a former official.
But most of Mr. Trump’s day, according to the internal schedules, has been defined by executive time, a term pulled from the private schedules that has become shorthand for the hours Mr. Trump spends watching television and responding on Twitter to the coverage. Most days, the schedule showed that Mr. Trump began his day at 8 a.m. with a three-hour block dedicated to that time.
In February, the website Axios published three months of the schedule and calculated that Mr. Trump spent 60 percent of his days in the unstructured time. White House officials pushed back on the report, writing on Twitter that the schedules did not show “the hundreds of calls and meetings” that Mr. Trump took daily. And Kellyanne Conway, counselor to the president, said a smaller circle of key aides received a more secret and more detailed version of the president’s schedule.
Mr. Trump’s allies said cracking down on the schedule leaks was important to creating a functional work environment, based on trust, in the White House. “It’s a problem if you have an internal staffer working to embarrass the president,” said Bryan Lanza, a former Trump campaign adviser.