Backstage at the Metropolitan Opera, a rehearsal pianist was ready to launch into Wagner’s famous “Ride of the Valkyries.” But before the battalion of singers could unleash their war cries — “Hojotoho!” — the conductor, Philippe Jordan, paused to offer a brief elocution lesson.
He gave a nod; the pianist thundered into the familiar, galloping rhythms; and the eight Valkyries began to sing — powerfully enough to shake the floorboards of the small rehearsal hall.
Conducting the four operas of the “Ring” — about 15 hours of music — is a test of endurance and artistry unlike any in opera. For the revival of Robert Lepage’s production this year, which continues through May 11, the Met has entrusted the task to Mr. Jordan, 44. Relatively little known in the United States, he stands at the crossroads of a major career in Europe: Having spent nearly a decade leading one of the world’s most storied opera companies, the Opéra National de Paris, he is now preparing to become music director of the grand Vienna State Opera in 2020.
But he is spending this spring rehearsing and performing the “Ring” in New York. Despite the relentless pace, he said, it felt almost like an idyll.
Mr. Jordan is something of a rarity: a second-generation Wagner conductor. His father, Armin Jordan, conducted a number of acclaimed Wagner performances around the world, as well as the soundtrack of Hans-Jürgen Syberberg’s beguiling, experimental 1982 film of “Parsifal.” Illness curtailed the elder Mr. Jordan’s plans to conduct the “Ring” in Seattle at the beginning of this century, and forced him to cancel a planned Met debut; he died in 2006.
Now his son is emerging as a major Wagnerian, leading acclaimed performances of the master’s works in Paris; at Bayreuth, the festival Wagner founded in Germany; and now at the Met, where his propulsive but intense “Ring” is earning strong reviews. Before he leaves his position in Paris, Mr. Jordan will conduct a new production of the “Ring” next year, staged by Calixto Bieito.
He got a grounding not only in opera but also in operettas and musicals; his first piece was “Funny Girl,” and he said he did “West Side Story” dozens of times. It was the approach favored by his father, who wanted him to learn the practical aspects of conducting by doing it, rather than going the route of conservatories, competitions and sporadic concerts. After several seasons in Ulm, Mr. Jordan became an assistant under Daniel Barenboim at the Berlin State Opera.
He said he had also come to realize that many Wagner works are played more loudly and heavily than the composer intended; he cited the opening of “Die Meistersinger von Nürnberg,” which he conducted in Bayreuth, as a prime example.
For decades at the Met, the “Ring” was the province of James Levine, its longtime music director. But in 2011, midway through the introduction of Mr. Lepage’s much-debated production, Mr. Levine was sidelined by a spinal injury and replaced by Fabio Luisi. The Met’s post-Levine “Ring” era had begun. Mr. Jordan was cast for this revival even before the Met fired Mr. Levine last year amid allegations of sexual abuse and harassment, which he has denied.
Now the eyes of the opera world are on Mr. Jordan as he prepares to assume the musical leadership of the Vienna State Opera, led in the past by Mahler, Richard Strauss and Herbert von Karajan. He was hired there by Bogdan Roscic, who will become the company’s next director in 2020, and who said he had been impressed by Mr. Jordan’s success in lifting the musical quality in Paris.
Mr. Roscic described Mr. Jordan as a conductor who “transcends national schools or specialties.” In Paris, he has led Berlioz operas and a starry new production of Verdi’s “Don Carlos” in the original French; and with the Vienna Symphony, where he has been music director since 2014, he conducted a Beethoven cycle, performed Tchaikovsky and reclaimed Bach from the world of historically informed performance.
Mr. Jordan plans to step down from the Vienna Symphony to devote himself to the opera — and, in a rare move in an age of jet-setting maestros, he does not plan to take a post at another orchestra, at least in the beginning. The Vienna State Opera has not had a music director since 2014, when Franz Welser-Möst abruptly resigned.
“I think the house needs more presence of a music director,” Mr. Jordan said, adding that he plans to conduct 30 to 40 performances a season, including two or three new productions.
But all that is more than a year off. Right now he is focused on “Götterdämmerung” — the last installment of the “Ring,” which will open on April 27 — then on doing two cycles of the “Ring” operas, each within the course of a week, as Wagner intended.
Christine Goerke, the soprano singing Brünnhilde, recalled that when she and a colleague began discussing free will and their characters’ motivations at one rehearsal, Mr. Jordan eagerly joined in.
