THERE SHE GOES Stream on BritBox. David Tennant and Jessica Hynes star as the parents Simon and Emily in this dramedy about the joys and challenges of raising a child with a learning disability, based on the real-life parenting journey of the show’s creator, Shaun Pye. The timeline jumps between the birth of Rosie (Miley Locke), the couple’s daughter, in 2006 and their daily life as parents in 2015, when a seemingly simple outing to the park can seem like a monumental undertaking. Pye based Rosie on his daughter, who was born with a chromosomal disorder, and used experiences from his family’s life as inspiration, creating a heartbreaking and compassionate portrait of a modern family.
PERFUME Stream on Netflix. This German crime thriller follows a detective as she investigates the gruesome murder of a young woman whose killer removed the scent glands from her body. The probe slowly begins to close in around the victim’s childhood friends, resurfacing past jealousies, traumas and secrets. The six-part series, loosely adapted from a 1985 fantasy novel by Patrick Süskind, is violent but compelling, and touches on issues of domestic violence and the ways women and men wield power.
OSMOSIS Stream on Netflix. Imagine a not-so-distant future in which you won’t be forced to sit through another disastrous date or hopelessly swipe through dozens of apps to find love. To find your soul mate, you need only grant a tech start-up access to your brain. That’s the central premise of this eight-part dystopian series, which follows a group of test subjects after they get a high-tech brain implant that can lead them to true love — an invention from scientist siblings who may change the world and become very, very rich. The show falls somewhere between “Maniac” and the Theranos scandal, and raises ethical issues that will feel familiar to viewers of “Black Mirror.” It imagines a world not so different from our own, in which lonely, isolated people place all their hopes in a quick technological fix, risking their personal freedom and privacy in the process.
BLESS THIS MESS 9:30 p.m. on ABC. If you want to fill the void left after the “Schitt’s Creek” season finale, check out this new comedy starring Lake Bell and Dax Shepard that follows a couple as they leave New York City for rural Nebraska. Upon receiving a farmhouse from a recently deceased relative, Mike (Shepard) and Rio (Bell) quit their jobs to become farmers in the Midwest, only to find out that the simpler life may not be so simple after all. With a little help from their small-town neighbors, Mike and Rio attempt to fix up their rustic home and build a life for themselves in the country.