Sports|Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Opens: Is There Room for Everyone?
Tottenham Hotspur Stadium Opens: Is There Room for Everyone?
Tottenham will open its billion-dollar stadium on Wednesday, an arena the club hopes will be a catalyst for the revival of its entire neighborhood. But not everyone is certain they will be included in those plans.
On the other side of the road, the change has been rather more drastic. The window seats at the Lilywhites Sandwich Bar now offer a view of the gleaming glass frontage of the $1 billion, state-of-the-art stadium that — starting Wednesday evening, when it hosts its inaugural Premier League game — Tottenham Hotspur will call home.
The territory is, of course, familiar: The new stadium is on the same patch of land as the atmospheric, historic, old White Hart Lane, where Spurs played for 118 years. The horizon, though, is different: the club hopes the new stadium represents not just a great leap forward for Spurs — proof, in concrete and steel, that this team belongs among Europe’s pre-eminent powers — but for English soccer as a whole.
Chris Lee, its chief architect, said he had looked at some 300 stadiums around the world for inspiration and incorporated the best elements he could find into what he labeled the “best” stadium on the planet: an arena supposed to be more modern than Wembley, sleeker than Old Trafford, bigger (crucially) than Arsenal’s home at the Emirates. It is supposed to set what Daniel Levy, the Spurs chairman, described as a “new standard” for sports stadiums.
The arena’s centerpiece is the biggest single-tier stand in England, capable of holding 17,500 fans, modeled on Borussia Dortmund’s Südtribune — known, more commonly, as the Yellow Wall. It claims to be home to the longest bar in Europe. It has a retractable field, allowing it to host not only Premier League matches but N.F.L. games, too. It has its own microbrewery and a restaurant run by a Michelin-starred chef. And, in what is surely a first for a soccer team, Spurs will have its own on-site sommelier.
The appeal for Levy and the club, of course, is the financial boost all of that can bring: more fans, spending more time and more money, all of it flowing straight into the team’s coffers. Levy said Tuesday that, with the extra revenue generated by the stadium, Spurs’ income would be in the world’s top 10.
This is a team that has long had to wheel and deal in the transfer market. On Sunday, the club’s manager, Mauricio Pochettino, admitted he and his staff had laughed at the sight of Naby Keita and Fabinho, £100 million worth of talent combined, on Liverpool’s bench when the teams met, representing a luxury way beyond Spurs’ means. Tottenham’s new home is, in time, supposed to change that, to turn Spurs into a club that can compete with the elite not just on the field, but off it.
The effects of the stadium, though, will resonate beyond Spurs’ balance sheet. The club has long claimed it can be a “catalyst” for the regeneration of the neighborhood around it. At a news media presentation on Tuesday, the club’s executive director, Donna Cullen, opened with a photograph of a burning car: a reminder of the riots that scarred the area — before spreading across the capital and the country — in 2011.
Both the club and the council project that the new stadium could pour around £293 million a year into the local economy; Spurs estimated that it would be responsible for more than 1,700 jobs. “This stadium and this new club is going to make a massive, massive difference to the people of Tottenham,” David Lammy, Tottenham’s member of Parliament, said this week.
That, too, will take time, of course. So far, the main visible differences to Tottenham High Road are the new facades on the sandwich bar, the convenience store and a handful of other properties across from the stadium. 
Smoking a cigarette outside the barbershop he has run for 25 years, Inan Gulecyuz said he was happy to wait. The stadium opening is, technically, bad news for him: Business drops on game days, he said, and with soccer and the N.F.L. to fit in, he will lose a little trade.
A little further from the stadium, Irfan Sahin was serving coffee in Fieldseat, his delicatessen, café, bookshop and organic food market. Soft classical music played overhead.
Sahin said that he expected the stadium to alter the character of the area, to encourage more businesses to open — “There is no other Michelin-starred restaurant in north London,” he noted — but then, he said, Tottenham is changing anyway: In London, gentrification is a constant tide, regardless of where soccer clubs play.
There are those in Tottenham, certainly, who feel disenfranchised by the speed of change and by redevelopment proposals backed by the council and the club.
That is the tension inherent in any regeneration, of course: the issue of who, precisely, it is supposed to work for, of whose needs it is meeting. “There is a thin dividing line between seeing the stadium as a catalyst for regeneration and a Trojan horse for social cleansing,” said Mark Panton, an academic at Birkbeck College who has written extensively on the dispute.
There is one change left to come: Transport for London, the capital’s transit authority, is expected to accept a proposal to rename White Hart Lane, the nearest train station to the stadium, to Tottenham Hotspur.
It is not unprecedented — Arsenal has had its own tube stop, dating to the 1930s — but nor is it universally popular. The objection is based on the idea that erasing the station’s name wipes clean a century or so of history; that it needlessly, ham-fistedly conflates the identities of Tottenham the area and Tottenham the team; that it creates the impression, deep down, below the fresh coats of paint, that the place exists to serve the club, rather than the club existing to reflect the place.