New York|He Killed His Wife for Her Fortune. Their Children Still Pleaded for Leniency.
He Killed His Wife for Her Fortune. Their Children Still Pleaded for Leniency.
A judge sentenced Roderick Covlin to 25 years to life for the murder of his estranged wife. His children had asked for a lesser sentence.
More than nine years separated the strangulation of a woman in her Upper West Side apartment and the conviction of her estranged husband, Roderick Covlin, for her murder.
By the end of the trial in March, nearly everyone in Mr. Covlin’s life viewed him as a calculated sociopath, willing not only to kill his wife, Shele Danishefsky Covlin, for her fortune, but to manipulate the couple’s two children to gain access to their inheritance.
Still, when Mr. Covlin was sentenced in State Supreme Court in Manhattan on Wednesday, there was a final twist to the sad saga: The couple’s children pleaded with the judge for leniency for their father.
Myles Covlin, who is 12, approached Justice Ruth Pickholz to speak, standing a short distance from his father at the defense table.
“I lost one parent and do not want to lose a second,” Myles said as his father turned toward him and wiped tears from his eyes.
His sister, Anna Covlin, now 18, did not attend the sentencing. But in a letter read by her paternal grandmother, she also urged the judge to give her father a lighter sentence than prosecutors had recommended.
Ms. Covlin was only 9 in December 2009 when she woke and discovered her mother facedown in bloody water in the tub of their Upper West Side apartment. Her father lived across the hall and had a spare key to the apartment. Ms. Danishefsky Covlin had filed for divorce, and the day she died, she was planning to cut Mr. Covlin out of her will.
Justice Pickholz was unmoved by the children’s statements. She called the evidence presented at trial overwhelming and sentenced Mr. Covlin to the maximum allowed for second-degree murder — 25 years to life.
In the end, the lead prosecutor, Matthew Bogdanos, mounted a case built largely on circumstantial evidence. He persuaded a jury that only Mr. Covlin could have committed the murder and that he had held his wife in a chokehold, squeezing her neck so tightly that he had snapped the hyoid bone and caused blood vessels to burst in her eye.
Mr. Bogdanos said Mr. Covlin’s criminal behavior continued long after his wife’s death. He urged his daughter, for instance, to accuse her grandfather of rape as part of a scheme to regain custody of the children from his parents.
At another point he had planned to take Anna to Mexico, where she would be married, so that she could be emancipated from his parents. There was also evidence presented at trial that Mr. Covlin tried to forge a letter from his daughter, in which she took responsibility for the killing.
Mr. Covlin even made plans to kill his own parents, Mr. Bogdanos said.
Speaking in the hallway after the sentencing, the Manhattan district attorney, Cyrus R. Vance Jr., said the family’s story contained lessons for all New Yorkers.
