Experts say adults and children alike can benefit from avoiding canned goods and certain plastics and substituting natural products for commercial cleaning products.
There is significant evidence that several types of chemicals can in different ways interfere with the hormones that our bodies use as messengers for everything from sexual maturity and fertility to how we handle appetite and fat storage.
But what can we actually do to shield ourselves (and our gametes) and our children? The subtitle of Dr. Trasande’s book suggests that there are ways to protect ourselves and our families from substances that he and other environmental medicine specialists believe we will come to see as more and more dangerous, even at comparatively low levels.
The four categories of particularly concerning chemicals include pesticides, which can contaminate our produce; phthalates, which are used in cosmetics and personal care products and also in many kinds of food packaging; bisphenols, which are in the lining of aluminum cans; and flame retardants used in electronics, furniture and mattresses.
“There are straightforward, simple steps to reduce exposures that don’t have to break the budget,” Dr. Trasande said. He suggested avoiding canned food consumption, along with foods that are highly packaged or processed, and in particular avoiding plastic bottles or containers marked on the bottom with 3, 6 or 7.
Plastics marked with a 3, he said, are worrisome for phthalates, which inhibit male sex hormones and disrupt metabolism. A number 6 denotes styrene, which is a known carcinogen. And plastics marked with 7 contain bisphenol, which in the lab has been shown to be related to obesity.
These are very difficult links to draw, and it’s also possible that people who tend to eat ultraprocessed foods are making many other lifestyle choices that affect their health. One possible link might be, “phthalates and other food contaminants in those processed foods may inhibit testosterone function, which is known to be a major risk factor for adult cardiovascular disease and stroke,” Dr. Trasande said. But this kind of study can show only an association, it doesn’t establish cause and effect, and Dr. Trasande pointed out that the conclusions have been disputed by other experts.
“Buy fresh food not wrapped in plastic,” Dr. Trasande said, since the contact of the food with the packaging is what you want to avoid.
This was the story with lead, and more recently, he said, it was almost the story for many plastics. Lead was present in so many places in children’s environments, from paint to auto emissions, and was gradually understood to be more and more dangerous, even at levels of exposure which had been thought to be safe.
It’s important to try to influence product manufacturers to move in the right direction, Dr. Arora said, and to take the trouble to look for products made in ways that minimize the impact on the consumer and more broadly on the environment, for example, by using biodegradable dyes. He buys jackets made from 100 percent recycled material, he said, and has switched to secondhand clothes.