At a university where its honor code explicitly prohibits “homosexual behavior,” Matt Easton’s very public coming out was not without risk.
As I’m sure many of you have felt, I recall countless times here at the Y where I have battled and fought in prayer with my maker. It was in these quiet moments of pain and confusion that I felt another triumph, that of coming to terms — not with who I thought I should be, but who the Lord has made me be.  I am loved and important to the plan of our great creator. Each of us are. Thank you to my parents, my friends, and my mentors here at B.Y.U., who have offered support and helped me remember my divine [inaudible] here on this earth. Four years ago, it would’ve been impossible for me to imagine that I would come out in front of my entire college. It is a phenomenal feeling, and it is a victory for me in and of itself.
At a university that considers same-sex marriage a “serious transgression,” and where its honor code explicitly prohibits “homosexual behavior,” Matt Easton’s very public coming out was not without risk.
But Mr. Easton, the valedictorian of Brigham Young University’s political science department, put aside fears that he could be expelled and found the courage he said was inspired by a presidential candidate.
“I stand before my family, friends and graduating class today to say that I am proud to be a gay son of God,” he said last Friday in a commencement speech before 10,000 people inside the Marriott Center in Provo, Utah.
To his surprise, the crowd erupted into cheers.
Mr. Easton’s declaration — imbued with religious devotion and a call for social equality — came as the church and Brigham Young are wrestling with how to reconcile gay members of the Mormon faith. It came on the heels, too, of an academic year that has included the church’s reversal of a contentious policy that had condemned members in same-sex marriages as apostates and subject to excommunication, and in the wake of a grass-roots movement on campus to reform the university’s honor code.
Indeed, Mr. Easton’s coming out signals the emergence of a younger generation demanding that its views and identities be heard and embraced.
Patrick Mason, the chairman of Mormon studies at Claremont Graduate University, said Mr. Easton’s coming out marked “a sea change” happening both nationally and within the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.
Mr. Easton, 24, was raised in Salt Lake City in a family that has been members of the church for generations. After serving a mission in Sydney, Australia, he enrolled at Brigham Young. As a student, he was a member of its Political Science Honors Society and acts as the Republican state delegate for his home precinct in Cottonwood Heights, Utah.
In an interview Monday, he said he had always known he was gay. He told his parents two years ago, but never expected to come out while at Brigham Young, where any exploration of his sexual identity could result in losing his chance to earn a degree.
While the university states that “same-gender attraction is not an Honor Code issue,” the policy prohibits — and punishes — violations like immodest attire, premarital sexual activity and homosexual behavior. “Homosexual behavior includes not only sexual relations between members of the same sex, but all forms of physical intimacy that give expression to homosexual feelings,” the honor code reads.
Despite his fears — and the advice of his parents to conceal his sexuality from the university — Mr. Easton said he began to change his mind a few months ago, inspired by how Pete Buttigieg, the Democratic mayor of South Bend, Ind., who is running for president, had spoken about his faith and sexuality.
A turning point, Mr. Easton said, was watching the 37-year-old gay mayor’s speech this month to the Victory Fund, a group that supports gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender politicians, in which Mr. Buttigieg challenged Vice President Mike Pence on his opposition to gay rights.
But he was also inspired by something much closer to home: For years, the university has not allowed its L.G.B.T. group to meet on campus. At a rally this month to protest the university’s honor code, attendees observed five minutes of silence for gay and transgender students, a moment that cemented for Mr. Easton why coming out was so important.
The required theme was “celebration for all,” but he said he was anxious until he approached the lectern and looked out at the crowd that had gathered for B.Y.U.’s College of Family, Home, and Social Sciences ceremony.
And then he came out, speaking the words that his sister had never heard him say. People cheered and screamed and clapped, and many rose from their seats.
In a video of the speech he posted online, Mr. Easton smiled as he waited for the applause to die down.
Thinking back to that moment, Mr. Easton said on Monday that he was overwhelmed by the vocal support.
“It was better than I ever imagined,” he said.