One man wanted to change the raisin industry for the better. He got more than he bargained for.
FRESNO, Calif. — Millennials just weren’t eating raisins. So Sun-Maid, the century-old company with the iconic little red raisin boxes, hired someone to convince them that they should.
At 38, Harry Overly was decades younger than the tenured raisin man he replaced as the chief executive of Sun-Maid. But he had experience — as the North American head of the company that makes Bertolli olive oil, and in marketing roles at Wrigley and other food companies. He seemed suited to the job.
When he came west, though, he was taken aback by the level of animosity he encountered in the U.S. raisin industry, the entirety of which is crammed into a few hundred square miles in California’s Central Valley.
Three months into his tenure, which began on Halloween of 2017, Mr. Overly attended a meeting of some raisin industry players in the back room of a restaurant in Fresno, Calif. This introduction left him shaken. “I’m not saying this lightly, because — you can read about this in different spots — people kind of think there’s this raisin mafia out there and that kind of stuff,” Mr. Overly said.
Mr. Overly installed a security system at his house in Fresno. At Sun-Maid headquarters, he and other executives discussed the necessity of active shooter trainings. As rumors about Mr. Overly’s motives swirled among raisin farmers, raisin packers and raisin bureaucrats, he became increasingly concerned about the safety of the raisins themselves. He feared that the current crop, drying from grapes to a wrinkly, shrunken state in bins on the Sun-Maid campus, would be set ablaze. It was their destruction by “fire, specifically,” that worried him, he said.
It makes sense that Sun-Maid and its competitors in the raisin sector, all working and living in the same water-hungry valley, might not be the best of friends. But the American raisin industry, which is estimated to be worth about $500 million, is particularly fractious. Other groups of farmers also band together to set prices; while raisin growers do that, they do not tend to cooperate on much else. That includes a reluctance to work together on raisin advertising, which is especially strange given that the raisin industry commissioned and paid for one of the world’s most recognizable advertising campaigns.
Another major incident that helped breed the mistrust that still festers in the raisin community culminated in a 2015 Supreme Court case that nearly leveled Fresno.
Marvin Horne, a small, sour man who had married into a raisin-growing family, was known as laconic and stubborn and nothing made him angrier than having to set aside some of his crop every year for the raisin reserve.
Raisin farming (like most kinds of farming) is risky. So, starting in the mid-20th century, raisin farmers began committing a significant share of their crop to a communal supply. This surplus was used to stabilize trade. (Some years, like in 2002, the year that sent Mr. Horne through the roof, growers were compelled to turn over almost half their crop.) Though raisin farmers do get paid for selling this supply, the money comes later, if at all.
So in 2002, Mr. Horne and his spouse, Laura, stopped sharing, and sued the government for taking their raisins without fairly compensating them. In 2015, the Supreme Court ruled in Mr. Horne’s favor, saying that the raisin reserve, in practice, constituted governmental appropriation of private property — illegal under the Fifth Amendment.
To Mike Mikaelian, a third-generation raisin farmer, that was a fundamental misunderstanding, and a huge blow to the industry.
And through these years, demand for raisins has fallen. The number of acres given over to the Thompson seedless grape, traditionally grown for raisins, has been halved from 2000 to 2019. The U.S. used to provide 50 percent of the global raisin market. Now it’s down to about 20 percent. Turkey exports more raisins than America does. China, Iran and South Africa have become more competitive in this space.
Mr. Horne, who will turn 74 this year, knows he is not well-liked in raisin town, but he stands by his decision. “Those guys are still living in the old paradigm,” he said.
As times got bad, representatives for growers felt they had no choice but to push prices as high as possible.
Mr. Overly, on coming to Sun-Maid, had no intention of entering a major raisin pricing fray. He wanted to jump feet first into the marketing work he’d been hired to do. He wanted to talk about the future, which, for Sun-Maid, was an ad campaign evoking the past.
The first Sun-Maid spot that has run in more than a decade features overjoyed children thrilled to be eating California raisins. The ads (which test well with millennials!) are predicated on nostalgia — on people’s memories of raisins as the first solid food their parents gave them.
“There’s no other snack brand that has the emotional equity that Sun-Maid has,” Mr. Overly said, with pride. The trick now is beating out all the other snack foods in the booming multi-billion-dollar snack market. “Thirty years ago when Sun-Maid was a prominent food brand, the competition for share of stomach was much less, particularly in the snacking world,” he said.
Why don’t millennials think of raisins whilst snacking? “It comes down to just a top-of-mind issue. They don’t think about it because there’s so many other things that they’ve got to choose from that are being thrown at them today,” he said.
A Mintel report from July of last year heralded the growth of a category it defined as “fresh snacking.” Fresh snacking? Sounds like raisins to the Sun-Maid chief executive!
Mr. Overly is also promoting some new raisin-focused snacks — this includes “sour raisin snacks” coated in flavors, and, yes, that includes grape flavor — and hiring some top female executives because before, there were few.
But his plan for raisin ascension did also include the dramatic step of lowering the baseline price for raisins, even if that meant challenging the Raisin Bargaining Association (R.B.A.).
He warned the Sun-Maid board as early as the spring of 2018 of that possibility. In September, negotiations with the association, and with Kalem Barserian, started in earnest.
“I’m the last man standing of another era, so to speak,” Mr. Barserian said. (Most of the people standing, it’s worth noting, are also men.) This was in his office, located in downtown Fresno, close to where his grandmother’s house sat near the center of the city’s old Armenian district. “I get a lot of respect,” he said.
In the past decade or so, Mr. Barserian and his spouse, Joyce, have spent a lot of their time just outside of Phoenix, where they own a vineyard. But Mr. Barserian was called back to the Central Valley in 2017 to establish a better price for the raisin farmer.
In 2017, raisins were damaged by extreme heat and in September, rain prevented them from drying properly in their vulnerable, wooden bins. This meant fewer raisins, which meant that raisins were naturally going to be more expensive.
But in 2018, the crop recovered. And still Mr. Barserian wanted to raise the base price to a record high — more than $300 higher per ton than the previous year with the disaster crop, and about twice as much as the year prior.
As it happened, Mr. Barserian kicked off price negotiations on the same day as a general strike of Sun-Maid factory workers, an unrelated but equally pressing emergency for Mr. Overly. On September 10, hours after more than 500 Sun-Maid workers walked off their jobs on the first day of a (successful) strike over wages and benefits, Mr. Barserian called Mr. Overly and told him the R.B.A.’s asking price.
“And I’m literally like, you guys are kidding, right?” Mr. Overly said.
The raisin industry runs on what Mr. Overly calls “coffee shoptalk,” which is to say, gossip. And the gossip was that Sun-Maid’s new chief executive didn’t want to pay a fair price to farmers.
Sun-Maid’s growers were told by other growers that they were going to go broke. Its board members were being scolded in public.
The atmosphere in raisin town became tense. Peter Nunez, the head of the local teamster’s union, said that during the strike additional security around the Sun-Maid factory was noticeable — and unusual.
The negotiations between Sun-Maid and the R.B.A. continued to go poorly. Nothing convinced Mr. Overly he should accept a second bid that lowered the price by $100 and committed to a two-year price deal.
“I don’t think you guys are understanding the supply and demand dynamics here,” the Sun-Maid chief thought. So, on October 22, he pulled Sun-Maid out of the R.B.A.
The death threats started that month. Some came over the phone, some were made in-person; there were between four and six in all, as well as the ominous “you can’t run” note. Mr. Overly declined to identify the threat-makers.
He also said: “I mean somebody might have threatened somebody. But that’s just the farm …” He trailed off.
Well before the negotiations, Mr. Overly and Mr. Barserian had agreed to participate in a panel at the Grape, Nut & Tree Fruit Expo on November 13 at the Big Fresno Fairgrounds. Each would present his view of the state of the raisin industry, and answer questions.
As Mr. Overly had anticipated, the room that day was filled with independent growers and R.B.A. allies. There were only about 20 Sun-Maid people in attendance, including Steve Kister, Sun-Maid’s interim chairman, and Rick Stark, its grower relations manager.
Mr. Barserian spoke first. He spoke of the uncertainty of the future, of global competition and of the fallowing of raisin vineyards across the Central Valley. He thanked the non-Sun-Maid packers who had signed with him, who were dedicated to getting farmers the best price. He said that the number of bearing acres would continue to drop.
“Many of us are getting old,” he said.
“The audience was very attentive,” Mr. Malcolm later wrote of the event.
Then Mr. Overly took the stage.
He spent about 25 minutes talking about the lasting quality of the California raisin and the need to defend its place in the global market. He talked about raising prices sustainably, and growing demand for the product. He said that it was market forces that compelled Sun-Maid’s decision to leave the R.B.A.
“You could have heard a pin drop in that room,” Mr. Kister said.
He and the other Sun-Maid people were proud of Mr. Overly. But they had no idea what the response to his presentation would be. Mr. Barserian was brought back to the stage. As two of the most powerful men in the industry, one less than half the other’s age, stood feet away from each other, the forum was opened to audience questions.
A man named Jim Phillips stood up. Mr. Phillips sells his raisins to Ray Moles of Sun Valley Raisins, and is not a Sun-Maid grower.
“He stands up and I thought, here we go,” Mr. Stark, the grower relations manager, said.
“We’re bracing ourselves,” Mr. Kister said.
“I’m not a politician. I’m a good Christian country boy. And I just want to do what’s right,” Mr. Phillips said later.
Mr. Phillips started his speech by saying that he had never been a Sun-Maid guy. But he agreed with Sun-Maid’s position. It was better to band together than stand apart. He turned to Mr. Barserian, the raisin titan. “Kalem, you don’t have a plan,” he said.
Grower after grower stood up and agreed. Mr. Overly seemed to have convinced the crowd.
Mr. Overly felt vindicated. “This was the first time that I could stand up in front of several hundred people and say, ‘no these are the facts,’” he said.
Tensions have, for now, eased. Mr. Overly said that if he were to rate the strain of the autumn as a 10, he’s now back down to one or two at most. This month, he was part of a delegation that traveled to Washington, D.C. to give the federal government a sense of what’s going on in raisin world — a delegation Kalem Barserian helped to put together.
Kalem Barserian didn’t travel to Washington with the group, though he loves D.C. He took his first trip there in 1970 under his mentor, “Sox” Setrakian, and almost left the raisin industry in the late 1980s to become a lobbyist. But he didn’t return in April because, he explained, he was trying to pass the baton.
At the R. B. A’s annual meeting in March, he said that he was often mad at Mr. Overly but that he’d get over it. In an interview later in the month, he grew animated discussing Mr. Overly occasionally, but also insisted that he was not angry at anyone.
“I need Harry to be the frontman in Washington,” he said.
He turned the subject to his vineyard in Arizona, the one where he and Joyce spend so much time.
Matthew Malcolm, the young millennial chronicler of the Grape, Nut & Tree Fruit Expo, spends a lot of time with both Mr. Barserian and with Mr. Overly. He tries to be sensitive to different viewpoints. But he’s happy with what transpired over the last year.
He’d like to be a raisin farmer someday himself, he said.
When asked why, he said raisins were a great source of natural sugar. He talked about how they fit in neatly with the food trends of the 21st century. He said he sees them as a food, not of the past, but of the future.
