U.S.|Wayne LaPierre Prevails in Fierce Battle for the N.R.A.
Wayne LaPierre Prevails in Fierce Battle for the N.R.A.
INDIANAPOLIS — After a power struggle roiled the National Rifle Association’s annual convention over the last few days, the group’s board unanimously re-elected Wayne LaPierre as chief executive on Monday and selected a new president to replace Oliver L. North, attendees at its annual board meeting said.
Mr. North’s successor is Carolyn D. Meadows, a longtime member who was also elected unanimously, as the group did not seek to replace Mr. North with another celebrity. The N.R.A.’s presidency historically has been a largely ceremonial post, though Mr. North had sought to make it a paid one.
The power struggle began last Wednesday when Mr. North warned that unless Mr. LaPierre resigned, one of the N.R.A.’s top contractors would release “a devastating account of our financial status, sexual harassment charges against a staff member, accusations of wardrobe expenses and excessive staff travel expenses,” according to details provided in a letter Mr. LaPierre sent the next day to the N.R.A. board.
Mr. LaPierre viewed the threat as an extortion attempt, and the board sided with him in the brief internal battle. Mr. North and his allies have said he was trying to seek a needed review of allegations in recent news reports that the group had potentially violated its tax-exempt status.
The dispute was related to a bitter legal battle between the N.R.A. and one of its largest contractors, the Oklahoma-based advertising firm Ackerman McQueen. So intertwined has the firm been with the gun rights group that many of the most visible N.R.A. personalities are Ackerman employees, including Mr. North.
The N.R.A. was chartered in New York, and the attorney general’s office has broad authority over tax-exempt groups registered in the state. An investigation by the office recently forced the closure of Mr. Trump’s charitable foundation.
Tax experts said it could be difficult for the N.R.A. to move its charter and assets to another state while under investigation.
