Like a particularly aggressive strain of kudzu, your children's artistic output will invade every room of your home if you don’t battle it back.
One of the things I found surprising about having children was the sheer volume of stuff they create. Like a particularly aggressive strain of kudzu, their artistic output will invade every room of your home if you don’t battle it back. We have chalkboard decals on our walls and mini whiteboards and many other reusable canvases. It doesn’t matter. 
Because I am a monster, I delight in throwing my children’s artwork away while they’re sleeping. 
Let me explain. We live in an apartment without a basement or storage space, and I know that if we didn’t clean out their art bins on a weekly basis, we would be buried under stacks of “Moana” printouts with three scribbles on them. On a monthly basis, we do a more thorough pass through the bins and throw out most of the stuff we didn’t throw out on the first pass.
Because I’m not a total monster, I do take their bigger and more beloved projects and put them on our fridge. Though ultimately most of those are bound for the landfill after they’ve been displayed for a month or two.
This method occasionally comes back to bite me — a few times a year my older daughter will ask what happened to a specific piece of art, and I have to fess up to chucking it. 
I’m lucky to have cleaning expert and frequent Times contributor Jolie Kerr on hand to show me a better, less monstrous way. This week she tells us how to organize and save your kids’ artwork. Jolie spoke to art teachers and professional organizers and got their best tips. One piece of Jolie’s guidance I’m implementing right away is to involve my kids in choosing the artwork we display on the fridge. “Go through the art together with the little artists themselves,” and have a conversation about what they like best and why, Jolie suggested. She also has recommendations for digital storage sites, so if you delight in recycling all those papers like I do, you can keep the most cherished artwork for posterity without keeping the actual objects.
If you have other kid messes you’d like guidance on, drop us a line. Personally, I need to know how to get something called “unicorn snot” out of my kid’s clothes.
P.S. — If you’re enjoying this newsletter, sign up to receive it in your inbox, or forward it to a friend who is buried in pipe cleaners. Follow us on our beautiful new Instagram @NYTParenting.
Want More on Kid Art and Cleaning It Up?
Jolie Kerr has already written about many kid-related messes and how to clean them for Offspring, Lifehacker’s parenting site. Two of my personal faves: What to do when your kid barfs on the couch and how to get breast milk stains out of your clothes.
New York Magazine’s product recommendation site, The Strategist, has a series of articles on the best toys for kids at different ages, according to child psychologists. In their gift recommendations for 5-year-olds, they have two craft projects that were a big hit in my household: Perler beads and Kid Made Modern art kits. I have a particular affection for Perler beads, which are a very Zen activity even for adults.
For the burgeoning artists in your life, The New York Times Book Review recommends a picture book biography of the surrealist artist Leonora Carrington called “Out of this World,” written by Michelle Markel and illustrated by Amanda Hall. Hall created “bright, busy spreads filled with enchantment,” to show Carrington’s artistic spirit.
I remembered “Share Day” — a weekly event — the day before rather than the morning of, so my daughter got to bring a favorite book rather than a Lego or whatever from between the car seats.
— Alyssa Walker, Waterville Valley, N.H.