Two people in Wisconsin have pleaded guilty to crimes related to providing support for the Islamic State, including a woman who used hacked Facebook accounts to share instructions for building explosives and mixing poison, the authorities said Monday.
Prosecutors said the two cases were unrelated. The woman, Waheba Issa Dais, 46, a permanent legal resident of the United States who was born in Israel, pleaded guilty to attempting to provide material support to the Islamic State, also known as ISIS.
She used a series of hacked Facebook accounts to pledge allegiance to ISIS, recruit new members for the terrorist group, encourage supporters who said they wanted to launch terrorist attacks, and share plans for building explosives, prosecutors said.
Matthew D. Krueger, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Wisconsin, said in a statement that Ms. Dais “promoted ISIS’s hateful, violent agenda and provided detailed instructions on how to harm innocent people” from her home in the Milwaukee suburb of Cudahy.
The second person, Yosvany Padilla-Conde, pleaded guilty to aiding and abetting a 2016 attempt by another man, Jason Ludke, to join ISIS by driving him from Wisconsin to Mexico, where the men thought they could evade United States law enforcement and travel to Syria or Iraq.
Federal prosecutors said Mr. Padilla-Conde, a Cuban national who resided in Milwaukee at the time of his arrest, posted video online pledging allegiance to the Islamic State and describing plans to travel to the Middle East. The Justice Department said Mr. Ludke was convicted last year of conspiring to provide material support to ISIS. Mr. Padilla-Conde will be sentenced this summer.
Ms. Dais and Mr. Padilla-Conde each face a maximum sentence of 20 years in prison and a fine of $250,000, the Justice Department said. Their plea deals were signed weeks ago but formalized in court on Monday, their lawyers said.
Craig Powell, Mr. Padilla-Conde’s lawyer, said his client had been set up by an undercover F.B.I. officer who offered to arrange for him to travel to Mexico if he made an ISIS video. He had been in “purgatory” since losing his immigration status after a criminal conviction because diplomatic tension with Cuba made him difficult to deport, Mr. Powell said.
Seamus Hughes, the deputy director of the Program on Extremism at George Washington University, said Ms. Dais’s case was the more significant of the two announced on Monday. He described Mr. Padilla-Conde’s case as run-of-the-mill.
He said Ms. Dais had been “kind of a key voice online” whose activities highlighted the importance of the Islamic State’s female supporters, especially those from the United States.
“American women supporters in general, but her in particular, tend to be the glue that hold different online spaces together,” he said. Ms. Dais played an important role online because “she wasn’t just a connector, she was providing some level of skill to individuals who otherwise wouldn’t have it,” he said.
Prosecutors said she used Facebook accounts stolen from unwitting users for her ISIS activities because she thought it would make it harder for law enforcement to track her.
Once she had control of an account, she replaced the original users’ friends with ISIS contacts and changed the display name to some variant of her online alias, Hind Salah Eddin, prosecutors said.
Ms. Dais, who has seven children, also changed the profile pictures to a publicly available image of a little girl that was taken as part of a project on the Yazidi religious minority in Northern Iraq. The Yazidi were forced to flee their homes en masse after ISIS occupied their territory in 2014, abducting thousands of women and girls to be used as sex slaves for jihadist fighters.
Ms. Dais wanted other ISIS supporters to be able to hack Facebook accounts, too, so she made a video that taught them how to do it, prosecutors said. She then used social media to share the video.
Ms. Dais used the stolen accounts to post how-to videos that provided step-by-step instructions on how to build explosives, including how to build an explosive belt worn by suicide bombers, the Justice Department said in a statement.
She also used Facebook to share a recipe for ricin, a deadly poison made from castor beans. When an undercover officer on Facebook asked her about it, she sang its praises, according to the plea agreement she signed.
“I will send you the poison of Ricin for it is easier, more effective, and cannot be traced, even if the person dies, it cannot be found in the body,” she wrote.
She said it could be especially useful in an attack against a government facility or a city water reservoir. But she warned the officer, who she thought was a jihadist, that it was dangerous stuff.
