The death of a college student who got into a car she mistook for an Uber has emphasized the need to use caution when hailing a ride.
That’s what students and administrators at the University of South Carolina are urging people to ask before they get into a car, to be sure it’s the one they called via a ride-sharing app.
The public safety campaign follows the death of Samantha Josephson, a 21-year-old student who was killed last weekend after getting into a car she mistook for her Uber, the police said. Across the country, at least two dozen women have been attacked in recent years after making a similar mistake.
Check the license plate, make and model of the car.
After booking a ride, a confirmation text should include the license plate number and a description of the car. It is critical to know what you are getting.
Depending on the tier of service you choose, Uber could send anything from a basic four-door sedan to a black sport-utility vehicle that is commercially registered and insured. A vehicle that is not what you expect is one of the more obvious giveaways that there might be a problem.
Any discrepancy is a red flag, and riders should not get into the car.
Ask the driver’s name.
That confirmation message from the ride-share app should also include a photo of your driver, so check to be sure they match. Always ask the driver their name and make sure that it also lines up.
Share your status.
Share your trip details with a friend, relative or a group through the sharing option available on the app. By adding your destination and sharing through a text, others can watch your ride, in real time, on a map. The “Trusted Contacts” feature allows you to select up to five friends or family members with whom you can share your whereabouts for every ride.
Uber and Via monitor drivers’ routes, sending alerts to their staff if the cars go off course. Riders with Lyft can also share the route and estimated time of arrival by tapping Send ETA.
Uber and Lyft also offer glowing dashboard lights called the Beacon and Amp that change color to match a hue on a passenger’s app. But the lights are in limited distribution and not available to all drivers. Lawmakers in South Carolina have proposed a law, named for Ms. Josephson, that would require all ride-share drivers to display a lighted sign.
If you suspect danger, or if you have an emergency, call 911 immediately. Uber also provides an in-app emergency button to connect riders directly to 911. It can be reached through a section of the app called the Safety Center.