Opinion|Kirstjen Nielsen Enforced Cruelty at the Border. Her Replacement Could Be Worse.
Kirstjen Nielsen Enforced Cruelty at the Border. Her Replacement Could Be Worse.
The Department of Homeland Security is being cleaned out and remade in Stephen Miller’s image.
Time finally ran out for Kirstjen Nielsen, President Trump’s beleaguered secretary of homeland security.
The terms of Ms. Nielsen’s departure are unclear. She met with the president on Sunday evening to discuss continuing problems at the southern border. At the conclusion of the meeting, Mr. Trump announced on Twitter that Ms. Nielsen “will be leaving her position” and he thanked her for her service, implying he had asked her to step down. Ms. Nielsen issued a formal letter of resignation, saying it was the “right time for me to step aside.” Considering the long-simmering tensions between the president and Ms. Nielsen, the most surprising thing about her departure may be that it didn’t happen months ago.
It’s no secret that Mr. Trump had a problem with Ms. Nielsen, whom he considered “weak” on matters of border security. The president and Stephen Miller, his hard-line immigration adviser, have long grumbled privately about the secretary’s insufficiently brutal approach to the surge in migrant families across the border. Last May, stories surfaced about Mr. Trump berating her in front of the entire cabinet for failing to stop the crossings.
This is hardly something to brag about. Whatever the secretary’s personal views, and no matter how impossible her job, she was the face of some of the administration’s most poorly conceived and gratuitously callous policies. At best, she was complicit and, yes, rather weak.
Ms. Nielsen’s response to her boss’s displeasure and abuse was often both morally anemic and strategically incoherent. Last summer, as Republicans and Democrats — and much of the American public — protested the administration’s practice of tearing migrant children from their parents at the border, Ms. Nielsen rushed to defend the policy. Scratch that. She insisted, repeatedly and bizarrely, that the administration had no such policy, even as her agency was enforcing and justifying it.
“We do not have a policy of separating families at the border,” she said on Twitter in June. “Period.” She repeated as much to Congress as recently as March.
But the grim repercussions of this nonpolicy are still being felt. Just on Friday, in a court filing, federal officials said it could take up to two years to identify possibly thousands of migrant children taken from their families beginning in July 2017.
Not that immigration was the only issue on which Ms. Nielsen floundered. On the critical question of Russia’s meddling in the 2016 elections, she was even less lucid. At times, she seemed to support the intelligence community’s findings that the Kremlin had been up to no good. Other times, she supported the view that Russia had not favored Mr. Trump in the election. Her every utterance seemed intended to obfuscate rather than to clarify.
Ms. Nielsen’s departure is part of a broader purging in her department. Two days before meeting with the secretary, the president withdrew his nomination for the next head of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, saying that he wanted to go in a “tougher direction.” On Monday, the White House confirmed that Randolph Alles, the head of the Secret Service, was on his way out as well. The general counsel for Homeland Security, John Mitnick, and the head of Citizenship and Immigration Services, L. Francis Cissna, are expected to soon follow.
For now, Ms. Nielsen’s acting replacement will be Kevin McAleenan, the commissioner of Customs and Border Protection. This leaves Homeland Security without a top official at either of its critical immigration agencies. It comes as the swell of migrant families across the border pushes the system toward collapse. Possible successors being discussed include Rick Perry, the secretary of energy, and Ken Cuccinelli, the former attorney general of Virginia.
Whoever takes Ms. Nielsen’s place, it seems likely that greater influence will be exerted by Mr. Miller, who inspires and reinforces Mr. Trump’s harshest impulses on immigrants and immigration. As the president becomes increasingly agitated about the border situation, Mr. Miller is said to be aggressively pushing to stock the administration with like-minded hard-liners. In addition to being a longtime critic of Ms. Nielsen, Mr. Miller is thought to have played a role in the withdrawal of the nomination of Ron Vitiello to lead ICE and the impending departure of Mr. Cissna.
If Ms. Nielsen is inclined to perform one last act of public service, she should come clean about the costs of the policies she enforced over the past year and a half, not only to the desperate migrants seeking a better life in the United States, but also to the thousands of employees of her department charged with carrying out an inhumane and ineffective agenda.