Business|Which Is Riskier, Prostitution or Investing?
Which Is Riskier, Prostitution or Investing?
If your only goal is to provide the basics of personal finance, writing a good advice book is straightforward.
You will need to discuss saving, including how to live below your means — and then probably move on to investing the money you’ve saved. At that point, you explain how to diversify a portfolio with stocks, bonds and cash equivalents, like certificates of deposit. The details may get complicated, but the overall design is simple enough.
But if you want to create a more complex personal finance book, things are likely to get challenging in a hurry, because you must accomplish three essentials.
First, you need to find a new take on those bare-bones basics. Then, to hook readers, you need to come up with an intriguing angle. Finally, you need to show readers how they will benefit from putting your novel approach to work.
Allison Schrager has clearly written a book of the complex kind: “An Economist Walks Into a Brothel: And Other Unexpected Places to Understand Risk” (Portfolio/Penguin, $27). She accomplishes two of the three tasks I’ve outlined, and does so quite nicely.
Unfortunately, she falls short in the important news-you-can-use category. And that’s too bad, because, as her title suggests, she has a provocative approach, and she has an interesting take on investing as well.
A columnist at Quartz, the news website, Ms. Schrager was trained as an economist. She teaches Strategic Risk Taking at New York University, and her book emphasizes the importance of getting a good handle on investment risk which, she says, many of us do not really understand.
For example, let’s say you want to figure out how much money you need for retirement. If you use her framework, she suggests you may discover that traditional approaches are riskier than you might have thought.
One such approach is to invest as much as you can, and, once you retire, draw out a fixed amount annually. A common rule of thumb is to withdraw 4 percent of your portfolio each year. But if you follow that rule strictly, the dollar amount of that annual 4 percent withdrawal will vary, depending on the performance of your portfolio.
You can gain certainty by buying a fixed annuity. That requires you to hand over some, or all, of your money to an investment firm in exchange for guaranteed payouts.
All of this is worth thinking about, but if you want to know what you should do, there is no answer here. The problem, in this case, is that Ms. Schrager doesn’t make a recommendation to buy annuities, nor does she come out against them. That kind of fuzziness, when it comes to practical recommendations, is a flaw in the book.
Telling people how to think about risk, in general, is fine. Specific ideas for how to invest with the best performance for the least amount of risk would have been better.
Still, Ms. Schrager tells many entertaining stories about how people in various professions as diverse as horse breeding and the military go about trying to reduce risk. I particularly enjoyed one about paparazzi: They form pools to share their pictures with other photographers to make sure they are not shut out when staking out celebrities. And I also liked the one about the poker champion who increases his chances of winning by playing far more conservatively than the typical recreational player.
Both of those stories support her subtitle, about going to unexpected places to understand risk.
But how is a reader supposed to benefit from these forays? I could infer from the paparazzi story that I should pool my investments by buying mutual funds as opposed to individual equities. My lesson from the poker champion could be to temper my expectations — you can’t win every pot — and also to keep my emotions in check.
But why should I have to work hard to come to conclusions like these, without ever being certain that they are the ones she intended? It would have been helpful if Ms. Schrager had connected the dots.
That said, the book fulfills its promise. Ms. Schrager did indeed walk into a brothel; several, actually, in Nevada. The point of that exercise was to understand how prostitutes can reduce the risk that comes with their job.
The solution for those she interviewed involved working in legal establishments, where management took half of the women’s revenue in exchange for greater security.
The women didn’t have to worry about undercover police officers, for example, because in legal brothels, they weren’t violating any laws. And they reduced the danger from nasty, violent customers because there were panic buttons in every room, with guards stationed nearby. And if the women needed protection getting home, the guards would escort them.
There were trade-offs, in other words, that made an occupation that was less than ideal a little bit better.
Is investing like prostitution? Other than the risk involved in both cases, I’m not sure. But her discussion did make the risk reduction in investing seem prudent, as well as minimal and inexpensive.