Readers respond to a Times Opinion initiative, The Privacy Project.
Privacy is not the problem. The problem is not being surveilled, but being poorly served.
Uber can’t figure out where I live. It picks me up at home, but because I am often dropped off across the street, the Uber app thinks that my address is different for pickup and dropoff, and it regularly takes byzantine routes to comply with its error. And the rest of the internet is equally incompetent.
If I buy underwear I spend the next year inundated with underwear ads despite the fact that having just bought underwear it is the thing I am now least likely to buy. The fact that Uber knows where I live and Amazon knows what underwear I like does not hurt the quality of my life anywhere near as much as the fact that they have no idea what to do with the data they so aggressively collect.
What we are losing to the internet is not primarily privacy — that we have furiously thrown away — it is intimacy. We are raising a generation that does not know how much better it is to have a friend than to be friended, how much more exciting to undress each other than to send genital selfies.
I am not frightened of the Chinese dystopia, or the coming Googlocracy; it is those hordes jaywalking with their faces buried in their phones that scare the data outta me.
The Times’s superb coverage of privacy in the digital age might further document those people who don’t blindly champion a digital world that has become a blitzkrieg of privacy invasion, social engineering, assaulting marketing and cowboy capitalism overseen by unaccountable lords of big data.
I am not an A.T.M. for profiteers who now invade by landline, cellphone, email and text whenever they wish and how often they choose. I am not data points from which to predict my behavior and politics. I am not a rat in their Skinner box and refuse to be one.
I applaud The Times for devoting precious resources to an important issue like The Privacy Project. I am excited to follow this series and consider the implications and opposing viewpoints. However, I wish there had been an introductory piece laying out the facts of the situation.
I do not believe I am in the minority when I say that it would be helpful to explain the following: Where are some of the most common places from which data is gathered from the average American? What type of data is gathered? To whom is this data sold? Through whose hands does it pass — how many companies, agencies, etc.? What are some of the ways in which it is being used? How is it affecting my daily existence?
With this basis and understanding, I believe that your opinion pieces will have more impact, the debate will be more robust and readers will be more thoughtful in their daily lives.
I was very surprised to learn from the article by the publisher, A.G. Sulzberger, that when I read the newspaper online or on the app, The Times is tracking me to send me targeted ads. I had thought it was just my browser that was tracking me. I would like to read the newspaper anonymously, just as I read the print edition, to which I subscribe. I’d even pay extra for no online tracking.
I don’t want The Times to “improve” my experience.
The Times has done a great service by exposing how pervasive, egregious and pernicious surveillance capitalism is. There are a number of steps people can take to greatly increase privacy.
On your phone, with Google and many other apps you can turn off location services so your location data will no longer be stored in Google’s Sensorvault. One can use browsers or plug-ins that make the use of tracking by cookies more difficult, and one can use the private browsing feature. Most apps and web services have the ability to turn off tracking.
We don’t absolutely need Facebook and Instagram and can also limit their use of sharing data. The Times could do a great service by printing instructions on how to do this.
Thank you for The Privacy Project. A suggestion: Congress should create a new federal Department of Privacy Rights. It would monitor privacy issues in the public and private sectors, recommend legislation, educate the public about their rights and address safety issues. We need a national advocate with the ability to take action.
