SUNRISE, Fla. — Dale Tallon and Joel Quenneville are together again, this time with the Florida Panthers.
Quenneville, who is second on the N.H.L.’s career victory list, was hired Monday to coach the Panthers. It’s also a reunion, after Tallon hired Quenneville to coach the Chicago Blackhawks in 2008 and wound up watching him win three Stanley Cups there in a six-year span.
Tallon, now the Florida general manager, wasn’t there for those Chicago titles; he was fired less than a year after delivering Quenneville. Finally, he gets a chance to work with Quenneville again.
Quenneville’s hiring was announced less than 36 hours after the Panthers’ season ended. Players were gathered Monday for exit interviews, an annual end-of-season rite. This time, they stuck around to meet the new boss, too.
It’s a bold move for the Panthers, who paid big to get Quenneville. He was owed $6 million for the 2019-20 season by the Blackhawks and it’s believed this deal keeps him in that salary range. It also represents a serious shift in the organization’s thinking, considering five of the last six coaches hired by Florida were first-time head coaches.
Not Quenneville. His 890 wins are second only to Scotty Bowman in N.H.L. history. He’s one of 11 coaches with three Stanley Cups.
Quenneville replaces Bob Boughner, who was fired Sunday after two seasons. Buffalo Sabres Coach Phil Housley was also fired Sunday, the day after the regular season ended, and the Los Angeles Kings said Willie Desjardins, their interim coach for most of the season, would not return next season.
Tallon wasn’t looking to fire Boughner, and made clear that he still holds him in high regard.
But when Tallon read an article that suggested Quenneville was itching to coach again, the wheels started spinning. Tallon started by going to Panthers owner Vincent Viola to discuss the option and plot strategy. He then obtained permission from the Blackhawks to talk to Quenneville, who was fired by Chicago in November and was still under contract.
Quenneville going to Florida makes sense on many levels. He likes golf. He’s into horse racing, as is Viola. He and Tallon have stayed close.
There’s also clear promise on the ice.
Aleksander Barkov, Jonathan Huberdeau, Evgeni Dadonov and Mike Hoffman had big scoring years, and Vincent Trocheck has emerged as a true leadership voice. Goaltender Roberto Luongo, who is considering a return, is another clear leader. Florida plans on being aggressive on July 1 to find free agents who will immediately shore up a porous defense. Playing for Quenneville will be a selling point for those free agents.
When Tallon hired Quenneville in Chicago, the Blackhawks hadn’t won a playoff series in 11 years. Quenneville turned things around in a hurry.
Tallon is betting he can do it again.
