Representative Tim Ryan of Ohio, a Democrat from one of the nation’s most coveted swing states, announced his candidacy for president on Thursday, bringing the Democratic primary field to 17.
Mr. Ryan, who represents a district in northeastern Ohio that includes Youngstown and part of Akron, is perhaps best known at the national level for his criticism of House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, and his accompanying argument that Democrats have stopped connecting with working-class voters, especially in the Midwest. He challenged Ms. Pelosi for the minority leader position in 2016 and, two years later, was again a leader of a push to elect someone else.
In an interview with The New York Times a few hours later, Mr. Ryan argued that he was better positioned than any other candidate to address “economic disorientation” in places like Youngstown and Akron. He spoke in particular about the potential of electric vehicles and other renewable energy industries to create jobs for people displaced by the decline in manufacturing.
It was the sort of message — progressive populism to challenge right-wing, Trumpist populism — that some voters had expected to hear from one of Mr. Ryan’s fellow Ohioans, Senator Sherrod Brown, who flirted with the idea of a presidential campaign before deciding last month not to run.
Over his 16 years in the House, Mr. Ryan has also shifted to the left on some of the country’s most contentious issues.
He made a similar reversal on gun policy after the Las Vegas mass shooting in 2017, breaking publicly from the National Rifle Association — which had previously given him A ratings — and announcing that he would take the roughly $20,000 he had received from its political action committee and donate it to organizations seeking stricter gun laws. That was the culmination of a shift in thinking that began after the Sandy Hook Elementary School shooting five years earlier, he said Thursday.
Mr. Ryan’s path to the nomination is steep, and not just because the field is so crowded. The last — and only — sitting House member to be elected president was James Garfield in 1880.
But Mr. Ryan believes there is an opening in the race for a Midwesterner who can focus on winning back the voters who flipped to President Trump in 2016, turning states like Michigan and Wisconsin red for the first time in about three decades. Of the 17 Democratic candidates, only three — Senator Amy Klobuchar of Minnesota; Mayor Pete Buttigieg of South Bend, Ind.; and Mr. Ryan — are from the Midwest.
On “The View,” Mr. Ryan said his daughter had called him one day, crying, to tell him her friend was going to have to move because a local General Motors plant had closed.
