‘THE BREAKDOWN WITH BORIS KHAYKIN’ at the Red Room at KGB Bar (April 24, 7 p.m.). Every fourth Wednesday of the month, upstairs at this East Village bar, Khaykin hosts a talk show with a twist in which guest improvisers perform scenes based on the interviews he conducts alongside his sidekick, “Uncle” Jawnee Conroy. This month, they welcome the comedian Ted Alexandro and the writer Eric Levitz from New York magazine’s Intelligencer, while Rebecca Vigil, Katie Hartman and Emma Vernon provide the play-by-play and color commentary through improv. Katie Hannigan performs a stand-up set, and the beat boxer Exacto serves as the house band.
‘LAS CULTURISTAS LIVE: I DON’T THINK SO, HONEY!’ at the Bell House (April 20, 8 p.m.). Matt Rogers and Bowen Yang host this pop culture podcast, which has reached the top of the best-of lists at Esquire and Vulture, and has become even more popular as a live event. On Saturday, they invite 50 of their comedian friends to deliver one-minute rants about the people who and trends that provoke them to say, “I don’t think so, honey!” Yang, who joined the writing staff of “Saturday Night Live” this season, got to throw his own shade onscreen recently when he portrayed the North Korean leader Kim Jong-un on the show’s March 30 episode.
‘TIM DILLON HAS GUESTS’ at Littlefield (April 21, 7:30 p.m.). This comedian has a development deal with Comedy Central to turn his former day job as a New York City double-decker tour bus guide into a TV pilot. On Sunday, Dillon leads the audience through a night of stand-up from some of his current favorites, who include Aparna Nancherla, Liza Treyger and Martin Urbano.
‘THIRST TRAP WITH ANYA VOLZ’ at Union Hall (April 25, 9:30 p.m.). Volz presents a monthly live game show of sorts in which she and her guest co-host break down current events and social media trends, and showcase live stand-up. This month, she welcomes performances by Teresa Lee, Christine Medrano, Melissa Lozada-Oliva and Jordan Temple.
‘200 IMPRESSIONS IN 60 MINUTES’ at Improv Asylum (April 20, 6 p.m.). The comedian and actor David Carl has taken his one-man celebrity-mash-up shows “Gary Busey’s One-Man Hamlet” (which The New York Times described as “deliciously deranged”) and “Trump Lear” to fringe festivals from New York City to Edinburgh. If you think that’s a feat in itself, then sit back and enjoy watching Carl run through, yes, 200 different impersonations in about an hour. If you miss him this weekend, he’ll repeat this trick on May 18 and June 22.
