We’re covering the roots of the recent national security shake-up, a new angle to China’s surveillance state, and a comeback for Tiger Woods.
President Trump insisted over the weekend that he was “not frustrated” by the situation at the southwestern border, but as his administration seeks sweeping changes, he has targeted his highest-ranking immigration officials.
The removal of top officials at the Department of Homeland Security came after months of clashes involving Stephen Miller, the White House adviser and architect of Mr. Trump’s immigration agenda. Mr. Miller and others have pressed for implementing policies that current and former officials have called legally questionable, impractical, unethical or unreasonable.
Another angle: In addition to what he has said are the dangers of immigration, Mr. Trump has played on fears of Muslims. He is likely to resurrect that theme during his re-election campaign and has apparently picked a specific target: Representative Ilhan Omar, a Minnesota Democrat who is one of the first Muslim women elected to Congress.
Looking ahead: A redacted version of the special counsel’s report is expected to be released this week. Mr. Trump’s plan, aides say, is to act as if the report itself is extraneous to the attorney general’s summary, which the president has said exonerated him.
Beijing is using a vast, secret system of advanced facial recognition technology to track and control the Uighurs, a largely Muslim minority group, The Times has found. It’s the first known example of a government intentionally using artificial intelligence for racial profiling, experts say.
China already maintains a surveillance net, including tracking people’s DNA, in the western region of Xinjiang, home to many of the country’s 11 million Uighurs. But the new systems, previously unreported, extend that monitoring to the rest of the country.
How we know: Five people with direct knowledge of the systems, who requested anonymity because they feared retribution, described them to The Times. We also reviewed databases used by the police, government procurement documents and advertising materials distributed by the companies that make the systems.
Nowhere is immune from global warming, but projections suggest that the Great Lakes area will be one of the few places in the U.S. where the effects may be more easily managed.
Consider Duluth, Minn., which is relatively cool, is mostly protected from the effects of sea level rise and has an abundance of fresh water. A climate adaptation expert at Harvard thinks the city and others like it might be ideal for climate migrants.
Another angle: Rising temperatures and increasingly unpredictable weather have been ruining harvests in Central America and adding to the surge of families migrating to the U.S., farmers and scientists say.
The 43-year-old ended a decade-long major championship drought on Sunday, winning his fifth Masters title.
“It fits,” he said as he put on the winner’s green jacket. The victory gave him his 15th major tournament triumph, three behind Jack Nicklaus’s record.
Column: Woods rediscovered his confidence on Sunday and his ability to intimidate the competition, our columnist writes.
Background: For Woods, a marital dispute led to a car accident in 2009 and a succession of lurid tabloid headlines. On the golf course, back injuries led to a series of operations and an addiction to painkillers. The Times profiled him last year.
For months, the government of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has been consumed by controversy after the resignation of the attorney general, Jody Wilson-Raybould, second from left above. She accused Mr. Trudeau’s office of inappropriately pressuring her in a criminal case.
For Mr. Trudeau, whose cabinet by design contains equal numbers of women and men, the episode has also raised questions about whether his government is living up to its billing as a feminist administration.
Google’s dragnet: One of our most popular articles over the weekend was about how investigators are using location information from the tech giant to find suspects and witnesses near crimes, sometimes snaring the innocent.
ISIS kidnapping: A rift emerged today between New Zealand’s government and the Red Cross over the humanitarian organization’s decision to identify a New Zealand nurse who was kidnapped by the Islamic State five years ago — and who her employer believes could still be alive.
Electric bike problems: Bike-sharing companies owned by Lyft have pulled electric models from New York, San Francisco and Washington because of braking problems.
Tax deadline: Personal income tax returns are due today. It may not feel like it from your refund (or lack of one), but you probably got a tax cut last year. Now is the time to check your paycheck withholdings for next year’s return.
Snapshot: Above, part of the open-air art installation “Detrás del Muro,” or “Behind the Wall,” along the Malecón in Havana on Sunday. The 13th Biennial in Cuba’s capital began this weekend, with works by more than 300 contemporary artists from 52 countries.
Boston Marathon: The 123rd edition of the event is today. Sarah Sellers, the runner-up in 2018, will be back this year, with a rare ambition to be an elite runner and work a practically full-time job.
“Game of Thrones” recap: The eighth and final season of the show began on HBO on Sunday. Here’s our review.
Credit...Romulo Yanes for The New York Times. Food Stylist: Vivian Lui.
Cook: This dish of tomatoes, rice and melted Cheddar can be best described as pizza rice.
Listen: “Boy With Luv,” the new song by the K-pop stars BTS, features the American singer Halsey singing in Korean, exactly the sort of bilingual exchange that’s all too rare, Jon Caramanica writes.
Watch: The new TV adaptation of “Les Misérables” hews much more closely to Victor Hugo’s often tragic novel than to the musical version.
Go: The musical “Beetlejuice” is now in previews on Broadway. Here’s how the eye-popping set came together.
Smarter Living: There are scientifically proven ways to increase your memory power. Consolidate information by retreating to a dark, quiet room for 10 minutes of inactivity (but not sleep). And you can increase your ability to retrieve memories by quizzing yourself on them, or sharing them out loud.
And we look at the benefits of sharing — whether triumphs, photographs or difficulties — in person rather than on social media.
With the arrest last week of its founder, Julian Assange, WikiLeaks is back in the headlines.
“Leaks” is obvious for the name of the anti-secrecy organization, which started in 2006, but where does “wiki” come from?
In 1995, the computer programmer Ward Cunningham introduced the first wiki, a website that’s collaboratively produced by users. He called it WikiWikiWeb, after the Hawaiian word for “quick,” which he had picked up from the name of an airport shuttle in the islands.
The word was later adopted by Wikipedia, the online encyclopedia that started in 2001, and it was added to the Oxford English Dictionary in 2007.
The wiki isn’t Mr. Cunningham’s only contribution to modern online life. He also gave his name to Cunningham’s Law, the idea that the best way to find the correct answer on the internet isn’t to ask a question, but to post the wrong answer.
To Mark Josephson, Eleanor Stanford and James K. Williamson for the break from the news. Chris wrote today’s Back Story. You can reach the team at |||EMAIL_ADDRESS||| • We’re listening to “The Daily.” Today’s episode is about Julian Assange.
• Here’s today’s mini crossword puzzle, and a clue: Newlywed’s new relative (5 letters). You can find all our puzzles here.
• The Research and Development team at The Times has launched the 5G Journalism Lab to explore how higher and faster bandwidth might unlock new ways to tell stories.