An hour into the session, Quinn skated in to speak quietly with Brendan Lemieux during a defensive routine. Lemieux, the 23-year-old prospect acquired in a trade for Kevin Hayes, had met Quinn only that morning after joining from the Winnipeg Jets.
With the Rangers more than a year into a rebuild, teaching a young team has been Quinn’s primary objective. Ten players on the Rangers’ roster are 23 or younger. Entering the final game of the season, the Rangers have just four wins in 19 games since the trade deadline on Feb. 25, though seven losses were by a single goal, including five in overtime or a shootout.
“We were close, but that doesn’t cut it in this league,” Quinn said.
He arrived in New York last May after five years as the head coach at Boston University and more than two decades leading or assisting predominantly A.H.L., college and national team development programs. Quinn’s own promising playing career came to an abrupt end in college with the diagnosis of hemophilia and a life-threatening injury.
General Manager Jeff Gorton called Quinn’s track record with young players a huge part of his appeal. That recent history included work with four first-round picks while leading B.U., a group headlined by the Buffalo Sabres star Jack Eichel. Quinn, 52, had taken over for the longtime coach Jack Parker — for whom Quinn played in the 1980s — and he expected to spend his career there even as three N.H.L. teams called to gauge his interest.
Quinn has so often preached his desire that the Rangers play “fast, physical, and relentless” hockey that some players refer to the phrase as “our team slogan.” His first season was notable for its hard practices, blunt postgame assessments and healthy scratches. Quinn’s players, past and present, consistently mention his honest and direct style of giving feedback.
“He’s very good at communicating, but he’s so smart about the way he does it, too,” Eichel said.
In hindsight, Rodrigues realized his coach was right.
Quinn attributed that plain-spoken manner partly to his father — “an old-school Irish cop” — and to his sudden diagnosis as a college sophomore with hemophilia B, also known as Christmas disease.
After Quinn dealt with persistent bruising throughout the 1985-86 season, B.U.’s team physician suggested he get blood work after the playoffs. The tests showed hemophilia.
Quinn continued playing for B.U., but, after an injury-plagued junior season, he badly sprained his right ankle playing pickup basketball. The bruising turned into compartment syndrome, which required surgery. In his Rangers office recently, he rolled down a red-and-blue striped sock to expose a scar running down the outer half of his calf muscle to his ankle.
He was in the hospital for five weeks and said he almost bled to death. His collegiate hockey career was over. Quinn remained at B.U. to finish his sociology degree and helped coach the school’s junior varsity hockey team.
In 1991, the F.D.A. approved a drug trial to help hemophiliacs clot more quickly. By injecting himself before every practice and game, Quinn returned to the ice in what he refers to only as a “pseudo-comeback.” He had not skated in four years and had lost some mobility in his right foot.
Quinn signed with the Rangers in 1992 and played a year and a half of minor league hockey. He had been a lock for the 1988 Olympic team but was a late cut from the ’92 squad. He tried out one final time for the 1994 roster, but was cut early.
The night he was cut, Quinn was in his family’s home in Cranston, R.I., when his former B.U. assistant coach Ben Smith called. Smith had taken over as Northeastern head coach and offered Quinn an assistant job. He drove to Boston the next day.
Quinn spent two nomadic decades in the coaching ranks. He was associate coach of B.U.’s 2009 N.C.A.A. championship team and was head coach of the 2015 squad that lost in the national title game. He was known for his recruiting panache.
Now, Quinn is charged with coaxing the most out of the Rangers’ young talent.
Quinn said the Rangers had “some good pieces here to build around,” citing the advances the Islanders and the Canadiens have made since last season.
A talented new piece of the puzzle is likely on its way. The Rangers will participate in the N.H.L. draft lottery on Tuesday.
“You really get a chance as the coach to be very involved in the process of the next great team here, hopefully,” he said.